Wiki for products made by Fractal Audio Systems, maintained by members
of the community.

Drive block

From Fractal Audio Wiki

Jump to navigation Jump to search

Contents

- 1 Drive block
- 2 About the Drive block
- 3 Drive types
  - 3.1 Per category
  - 3.2 Per clip type
- 4 Overdrive, distortion, fuzz
- 5 Fuzz, buffers and impedance
- 6 Drive controls
- 7 CPU usage
- 8 Input Boost in Amp block
- 9 Parameters
  - 9.1 Mix
  - 9.2 Dry Level
  - 9.3 Bass Response, Low Cut
  - 9.4 Sample Rate
  - 9.5 Bit Reduce
  - 9.6 Slew
  - 9.7 Graphic EQ
  - 9.8 Oversampling
- 10 Tips, tricks and troubleshooting
  - 10.1 Yek's Guide to the Fractal Audio Drive models
  - 10.2 Electronics
  - 10.3 Factory presets
  - 10.4 Choose and tweak
  - 10.5 Tighten the sound
  - 10.6 Turn Amp into Drive
  - 10.7 Turn Drive into Amp
  - 10.8 Add gain to high notes
  - 10.9 Disable diode clipping
  - 10.10 Warm up or soften a synth
  - 10.11 Tape Distortion for vintage flavor
  - 10.12 Distortion from the Cab block
  - 10.13 Dynamic Distortion block
  - 10.14 Stack multiple drives
  - 10.15 Ring modulator into fuzz
  - 10.16 Clone other pedals and devices
  - 10.17 PEQ instead of Drive
- 11 Drive models
  - 11.1 77 CUSTOM OD (MXR M77 Custom Badass Modified O.D.)
  - 11.2 ANGRY CHUCK (JHS Angry Charlie V3)
  - 11.3 BB PRE (Xotic BB preamp)
  - 11.4 BB PRE AT (Xotic BB preamp AT)
  - 11.5 BENDER FUZZ (Sola Sound / Vox Tone Bender)
  - 11.6 BIT CRUSHER (custom model)
  - 11.7 BLACKGLASS 7K (Darkglass Microtubes B7K)
  - 11.8 BLUES OD (Marshall Bluesbreaker Mk1)
  - 11.9 BOSOM BOOST (Friedman Buxom Boost)
  - 11.10 BOX O'CRUNCH (MI Audio Crunch Box V1)
  - 11.11 COLORTONE BOOSTER (Colorsound Power Boost)
  - 11.12 COLORTONE OD (Colorsound Overdriver)
  - 11.13 COMPULSION DISTORTION HP (Fulltone OCD)
  - 11.14 COMPULSION DISTORTION LP (Fulltone OCD)
  - 11.15 DS1 DISTORTION (BOSS DS-1 Distortion)
  - 11.16 DS1 DISTORTION MOD (modded BOSS DS-1 Distortion)
  - 11.17 ESOTERIC ACB (Xotic AC Booster)
  - 11.18 ESOTERIC BASS RCB (Xotic Bass RC Booster)
  - 11.19 ESOTERIC RCB (Xotic RC Booster v1)
  - 11.20 ETERNAL LOVE (Lovepedal Eternity)
  - 11.21 FACE FUZZ (Dallas-Arbiter Fuzz Face)
  - 11.22 FAS BOOST (custom model)
  - 11.23 FAS LED-DRIVE (custom model)
  - 11.24 FAT RAT (modded Pro Co RAT with LED clipping)
  - 11.25 FET BOOST (custom model)
  - 11.26 FET PREAMP (possibly based on the BOSS FA-1 FET Amplifier)
  - 11.27 FULL OD (Fulltone Full-Drive 2)
  - 11.28 GAUSS DRIVE (Mesa Flux-Drive)
  - 11.29 GRIDDLE CAKE (Crowther Hot Cake)
  - 11.30 GUARDIAN PHOTON SPEED (Greer Lightspeed)
  - 11.31 HARD FUZZ (custom model)
  - 11.32 HEARTPEDAL 11 (Lovepedal OD11 / Amp Eleven)
  - 11.33 HOODOO DRIVE (Voodoo Lab Overdrive)
  - 11.34 HORIZON PRECISION DRIVE (Horizon Devices Precision Drive)
  - 11.35 INTEGRAL PRE (TC Electronics Integrated Preamp)
  - 11.36 JAM RAY (Venuram Jan Ray)
  - 11.37 KLONE CHIRON (Klon Centaur / KTR)
  - 11.38 M-ZONE DISTORTION (BOSS MT-2 Metal Zone)
  - 11.39 MASTER FUZZ (Gibson Maestro Fuzz-Tone FZ-1A)
  - 11.40 MAXOFF 808 (Maxon OD-808)
  - 11.41 MCMLXXXI DRV (1981 Inventions DRV)
  - 11.42 MICRO BOOST (MXR Micro Amp)
  - 11.43 MID BOOST (custom model)
  - 11.44 MOSFET DISTORTION (Ibanez MT10 Mostortion)
  - 11.45 NO-AMP BASS DI (Tech 21 NYC Sansamp Bass Driver DI)
  - 11.46 NO-AMP BASS PRE (Tech 21 Sansamp SansAmp BassDriver DI)
  - 11.47 NOBELLIUM OVD-1 (Nobels ODR-1 BC Natural Overdrive)
  - 11.48 OCTAVE DISTORTION (Tycobrahe Octavia)
  - 11.49 OD 250 (DOD Overdrive Preamp 250: reissue)
  - 11.50 OD 250 GRAY (DOD Overdrive Preamp 250: original)
  - 11.51 OD-ONE OVERDRIVE (BOSS OD-1 Over Drive)
  - 11.52 PARADIGM SHIFTER (Barber Electronics Gain Changer)
  - 11.53 PI FUZZ (Electro-Harmonix Big Muff Pi, current)
  - 11.54 PI FUZZ - BASS (Electro-Harmonix Deluxe Bass Big Muff)
  - 11.55 PI FUZZ - TRIANGLE (Electro-Harmonix 1971 Big Muff Pi
    Triangle)
  - 11.56 PI FUZZ - RAM'S HEAD (Electro-Harmonix '70s Big Muff Pi Ram's
    Head)
  - 11.57 PI FUZZ - RUSSIAN (Electro-Harmonix Russian Big Muff Pi)
  - 11.58 PLUS DISTORTION (Distortion +)
  - 11.59 RAT DISTORTION (Pro Co RAT)
  - 11.60 ROYAL BASS DI (Noble Bass Preamp DI)
  - 11.61 SDD PREAMP (Korg SDD-3000 preamp)
  - 11.62 SHIMMER DRIVE (custom model)
  - 11.63 SHRED DISTORTION (Marshall Shredmaster)
  - 11.64 SONIC DRIVE (Maxon/Ibanez SD-9 Sonic Distortion)
  - 11.65 SUHR RIOT GE (R) (Suhr Riot)
  - 11.66 SUHR RIOT LED (L) (Suhr Riot)
  - 11.67 SUHR RIOT LED/SI (M) (Suhr Riot)
  - 11.68 SUNRISE SPLENDOR (JHS Pedals Morning Glory V4)
  - 11.69 SUNRISE SPLENDOR HI-CUT
  - 11.70 SUPER FUZZ (Univox Super-Fuzz)
  - 11.71 SUPER OD (BOSS SD-1 Super OverDrive)
  - 11.72 SWEDISH METAL (BOSS Waza Craft HM-2W Heavy Metal)
  - 11.73 T808 OD (Ibanez TS-808 Tube Screamer)
  - 11.74 T808 MOD (modded Ibanez TS-808 Tube Screamer)
  - 11.75 TAPE DISTORTION (tape distortion)
  - 11.76 TIMOTHY DOWN (Paul Cochrane Timmy V4)
  - 11.77 TIMOTHY MID (Paul Cochrane Timmy V4)
  - 11.78 TIMOTHY UP (Paul Cochrane Timmy V4)
  - 11.79 TONE OF KINGS (Analog Man King of Tone)
  - 11.80 TREBLE BOOST (silicon treble booster circuit)
  - 11.81 TS9DX + (Ibanez TS9DX Turbo Tube Screamer)
  - 11.82 TS9DX HOT (Ibanez TS9DX Turbo Tube Screamer)
  - 11.83 TUBE DRIVE 3-KNOB (Butler Tube Driver)
  - 11.84 TUBE DRIVE 4-KNOB (Butler Tube Driver)
  - 11.85 TUBE DRIVE 5-KNOB (Butler Tube Driver / Dean Markley Overlord)
  - 11.86 VALVE SCREAMER VS9 (Ibanez TS9 Tube Screamer)
  - 11.87 ZEN MASTER (Hermida Zendrive)
- 12 Videos

Drive block

Axe-Fx III — 4 blocks, 4 channels
FM9 — 3 blocks, 4 channels
FM3 — 2 blocks, 4 channels
AM4 — 2 blocks, 4 channels
VP4 — 4 blocks, 4 channels

ICONS — yes

Axe-Fx II, AX8, FX8 — 2 blocks, X/Y

[Drive block.png]

About the Drive block

From Axe-Fx 2 to Axe-Fx 3

  FRACTAL AUDIO QUOTES

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [1] The drive block in the III uses a higher oversampling ratio and
    double-precision filters in some places compared to the II.

SPICE simulation

  FRACTAL AUDIO QUOTES

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [2] New Drive block algorithm (FASPICE) implemented and working.

    [3] I've "cracked the code" on drive pedals and figured out a way to
    do a SPICE simulation in real time without using gobs of CPU. It's
    so simple I can't believe no one ever thought of it before but none
    of the papers even approach anything resembling the technique. This
    will bring "Ares" level modeling to the Drive block.

    [4] This algorithm applies to a particular set of circuits that
    incorporate diodes as a nonlinear component. SPICE modeling is
    particularly slow when modeling diodes due to convergence issues.
    However the diodes in drive pedals are used in such a way that
    there's a trick that can be employed to dramatically decrease the
    amount of CPU needed to simulate the circuit.

    [5] It normally takes a lot of CPU power to do a real-time
    simulation. The amp block uses an entire dedicated DSP. To do even a
    simple distortion pedal would normally require huge amounts of CPU.
    But I stumbled upon a simple trick that reduces it dramatically.

    [6] See the two diodes, D1 and D2? The type and quantity of these
    diodes (among other things that I can't reveal) affect the tone. D1
    is the "negative" diode. It conducts when the voltage is negative.
    D2 is the "positive" diode. It conducts when the voltage is
    positive. In this schematic the diodes are listed as 1N34A but in
    the original Distortion+ they were actually 1N270. If you select the
    Plus Dist model and go to the last page in the UI you'll see the
    type of diode is 1N270. You can change the type and quantity which
    will change the distortion characteristics.

    1N270 and 1N34A are Germanium diodes. They have a greater reverse
    saturation current (Is) and, hence, a lower forward voltage for a
    given current. This means they clip sooner. Silicon diodes, i.e.
    1N4148, 1N916, etc. have a lower Is and a greater forward voltage.
    LEDs have yet a greater forward voltage (smaller Is).

    This new firmware has 16 diode SPICE models that I collected from
    various sources that you can play with. 1N914 are often substituted
    for 1N4148 and vice-versa but they are slightly different so I
    included both. The original Tube Screamer had 1S1588 which, to my
    ears, are much different (better) sounding than 1N914 which are used
    in the newer Tube Screamers.

    [7] Firmware 10 uses new "FASPICE XD" modeling in the amp and drive
    block. It requires a bit more CPU but the accuracy is far better. I
    figured out a way to ensure that transcendental equations are always
    stiffly stable and converge in a fixed amount of time. Significantly
    faster and at least as accurate as trapezoidal, modified trap, gear,
    etc. algorithms. It dampens numerical ringing without the
    side-effect of damping actual circuit ringing. Once you see how it
    works it seems hard to believe that no one has thought of it before
    but I can't find a single paper or article that uses the technique.
    The only drawback is that frequency response is limited to about 1/2
    Nyquist but since we oversample that's irrelevant. So that's why you
    get the "amp feels like it's going to explode" but without the noise
    and artifacts.

For reference, Wikipedia's “SPICE” article says:

  “SPICE ("Simulation Program with Integrated Circuit Emphasis") is a
  general-purpose, open-source analog electronic circuit simulator. It
  is a program used in integrated circuit and board-level design to
  check the integrity of circuit designs and to predict circuit
  behavior.”

Oversampling

The Axe-Fx III lets you set the oversampling mode for Amp and Drive
blocks through the Oversampling Mode parameter in SETUP.

Read “Latency” for more information.

In current firmware, there's also an Oversampling parameter in the Drive
block. When set to HIGH the oversampling rate is doubled which results
in less aliasing. This increases CPU usage considerably.

Polarity

  FRACTAL AUDIO QUOTES

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [8] None of our effects ever invert the polarity of the signal as
    this will cause issues when running chains in parallel.

Mono

The output of the Drive block is always mono. It will also sum an
incoming stereo signal to mono, so watch out for phase issues.

Latency

Read “Latency” for more information.

Drive types

Per category

Clean boost

  Bosom Boost • Esoteric RCB • Esoteric Bass RCB • Eternal Love • FET
  Boost • FET Preamp • Guardian Photon Speed • Integral Pre • Micro
  Boost • SDD Preamp • Timothy

Bass

  Blackglass 7K • Bender Fuzz • Compulsion Distortion • Esoteric Bass
  RCB • M-Zone • PI Fuzz

Fuzz

  Bender Fuzz • Colortone OD • Colortone Booster • Face Fuzz • Griddle
  Cake • Hard Fuzz • Master Fuzz • Octavia Distortion • PI Fuzz • Sonic
  Drive • Super Fuzz

Amp-in-a-box, overdrive, distortion

  77 Custom OD • Angry Chuck • BB Pre (AT) • Blues OD • Box o’Crunch •
  Compulsion Distortion • DS1 Distortion • DS1 Distortion Mod • Esoteric
  ACB • Eternal Love • FAS Boost • FAS LED-Drive • Fat Rat • Full OD •
  Gauss Drive • Griddle Cake • Guardian Photon Speed • Heartpedal 11 •
  Hoodoo Drive • Horizon Precision Drive • Jam Ray • Klone Chiron •
  Maxoff 808 • MCMLXXXI Drv • M-Zone Distortion • MOSFET Distortion •
  Nobelium OVD-1 • OD 250 • OD-One Overdrive • Paradigm Shifter • Plus
  Distortion • Rat Distortion • SDD Preamp • Shimmer Drive • Shred
  Distortion • Sonic Drive • Suhr Riot • Sunrise Splendor • Super OD •
  T808 Mod • T808 OD • TS9DX • Timothy • Tone of Kings • Tube Drive •
  Valve Screamer VS9 • Zen Master

Metal

  M-Zone Distortion • Shred Distortion • Swedish Metal

Other

  Bit Crusher • Mid Boost • Octavia Distortion • Tape Distortion •
  Treble Boost

Per clip type

Diodes, Op-Amp

  77 Custom OD • BB Pre (AT) • Blues OD • DS1 Distortion • DS1
  Distortion Mod • Esoteric ACB • Esoteric RCB • Eternal Love • FAS
  Boost • FAS LED-Drive • Fat Rat • Full OD • Gauss Drive • Guardian
  Photon Speed • Heartpedal 11 • Hoodoo Drive • Horizon Precision Drive
  • Jam Ray • Klone Chiron • Maxoff 808 • MCMLXXXI Drv • M-Zone
  Distortion • Micro Boost • MOSFET Distortion • Nobelium OVD-1 • OD 250
  • OD-One Overdrive • Paradigm Shifter • PI Fuzz (all) • Plus
  Distortion • Rat Distortion • SDD Preamp • Shred Distortion • Sonic
  Drive • Suhr Riot Ge and LED/Si • Sunrise Splendor • Super OD • T808
  Mod • T808 OD • TS9DX + • Timothy (all) • Tone of Kings • Valve
  Screamer VS9 • Zen Master

FET

  Compulsion Distortion • Fat Rat • FET Boost • FET Preamp

Germanium

  Face Fuzz • Master Fuzz

Hard

  Bender Fuzz • Hard Fuzz

LED

  Angry Chuck • Box o’Crunch • Esoteric Bass RCB • FAS LED-Drive • Fat
  Rat • Suhr Riot LED • Suhr Riot LED/Si • TS9DX Hot

Silicon

  Bit Crusher • Colortone OD • Colortone Booster • Mid Boost • Shimmer
  Drive • Tape Distortion • Treble Boost

Tube

  Tube Drive (all)

Other

  Blackglass 7K • Bosom Boost • Griddle Cake • Integral Pre • Octave
  Distortion • Super Fuzz

Overdrive, distortion, fuzz

Transistors in electronical devices amplify the signal and when they
clip, they distort. The type of clipping determines how the pedal sounds
and how it is categorized.

Overdrive pedal 
    Based on soft gradual clipping, reacts dynamically and usually is
    aimed at complementing or replicating the sound of a driven
    amplifier.

Fuzz 
    Clips hard and aggressive and creates a buzzy sound, like
    something’s broken. Also, a fuzz depends on the impedance of the
    signal.

Distortion 
    Covers the middle ground, leaning towards higher gain instead of
    overdrive.

See these references for additional information:

- Reverb's “The Difference Between Fuzz, Overdrive and Distortion”
  article
- Pete Thorn shows “How To- And How NOT To- Use Overdrives And
  Distortions, Tone Secrets” in Part 1 and Part 2
- Ultimate Guitar's “Brief History of Fuzz” and “This is the Difference
  Between Overdrive, Distortion and Fuzz”
- Rhett Shull's video “How to REALLY Use Overdrive (like the PROs)”
- JHS's “The Origin of Fuzz” and “History Of Guitar Distortion”,
  “Understand The Types Of Overdrive Pedals On The Market” and “How To
  Find the Fuzz Pedal You Need” videos
- Wampler's “OverDrive vs Distortion vs Fuzz” and “How do the various
  clipping circuits work?” videos
- Dave Hunter: “The Big Buzz – Origins of the Fuzz Box & Tips on Getting
  Fuzzy”

If you have Apple TV+, watch the “Watch the Sound” series episode about
distortion.

Fuzz, buffers and impedance

Most fuzz pedals depend on a direct connection between the guitar pickup
and the input of the pedal. A modeler gets in the way because its input
is always buffered (inherent to the architecture), causing a modeled
fuzz to react differently than the actual pedal. This is demonstrated in
Wampler Pedals' video Do Fuzz Pedals sound better in a clean or dirty
amp?

To improve the emulation of such fuzz boxes, the Axe-Fx series, FM9,
VP4, AM4 and FX8 allow a specific input impedance setting or an “Auto”
setting. The AX8 and FM3 do not have this feature. When creating a
fuzz-specific preset, experiment with the Impedance parameter in the
Input block. Important: the “Auto” setting only works if the Drive model
is the first non-bypassed block after the Input block in the SAME row or
below.

Read “Input and impedance block” for more information.

Forum member AustinBuddy recommends setting Input Impedance to 90K in
presets which have a fuzz model as the very first (non-bypassed) block.
This doesn't apply to devices with fixed input impedance.

“Wampler's EQ trick with buffered fuzzes”

  FRACTAL AUDIO QUOTES

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [9] […] The Fuzz in the Axe-Fx reacts as though there is a buffer in
    front of it (because there is). It's a limitation inherent to all
    modeling products. I modeled it using a nominal source resistance. I
    forget what I used for the source resistance but it was probably
    around 100K ohms. To really simulate it you would need a controller
    to simulate the changing output impedance of the guitar.

    [10] You can simulate the effect of a guitar into a Fuzz-Face using
    the Input-Z feature.

    [11] The problem is that the signal is buffered and there is no way
    to model the interaction of the pickups with the circuit.

    [12] It's impossible to get a buffered device (like a multi-effect)
    to replicate fuzz pedals because the input impedance of a fuzz pedal
    is nonlinear. You can get close by using a static input resistance
    at the input to the device but it will never be exactly the same.

    Duplicating the behavior of a fuzz pedal requires that the pedal be
    the first non-bypassed block following the Input 1 block and the
    input block impedance must be set to Auto since fuzz pedals load
    down the guitar’s pickups.

    [13] The one thing no modeler will ever get perfect are fuzz pedals
    because of the interaction between the pickups and the pedal. The
    input to a modeler is necessarily buffered so that interaction is
    impossible to recreate.

    The reason it was not included in the FM3 was cost and space.

    [14] No digital device will do a fuzz properly because the input
    impedance is nonlinear. Digital devices necessarily have an input
    buffer. I will say our conventional, buffered, drive models are
    great.

Drive controls

The controls on the Basic page of the Drive correspond with the knobs on
the modeled devices.

  FRACTAL AUDIO QUOTES

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [15] The Tone control works the same as the modeled pedal.

    [16] The model's controls replicate the actual pedal.

    [17] Note that potentiometer tolerances can be as much as +/-20%.
    That means the real pedal on 5 could be equivalent to the model
    anywhere between 4 and 6. The same applies to the Tone and Level
    controls. The roll off the volume test is a good way to match the
    gain. Roll off the volume and if the model has less gain increase
    the gain control and vice-versa.

CPU usage

Drive models use varying amounts of CPU. In the Axe-Fx II, AX8 and FX8,
this was amplitude-dependent,meaning that CPU usage rises and fluctuates
when playing. This does not apply to the current generation, except for
the AM4.

The table below shows the CPU usage of the Drive models in the Axe-Fx
III (non-Turbo) in firmware 17 for the Axe-Fx III (empty preset). The
types that use the most power are diode-based.

2% to 4%

  Bender Fuzz • Bit Crusher • Blackglass 7K • Bosom Boost • FET Boost •
  FET Preamp • Face Fuzz • Hard Fuzz • Integrated Pre • Master Fuzz •
  Micro Boost • Mid Boost • Octave Distortion • PI Fuzz • SDD Preamp •
  Shimmer Drive • Tape Distortion • Treble Boost • Tube Drive (all)

8% to 9%

  BB Pre • BB Pre AT • Blues OD • Box o’Crunch • Compulsion Distortion
  (all) • DS1 Distortion (all) • Esoteric ACB • Esoteric RCB • Esoteric
  Bass RCB • Eternal Love • FAS Boost • FAS LED-Drive • Rat • Full OD •
  Heartpedal 11 • Hoodoo Drive • Horizon Precision Drive • Jam Ray •
  Klone Chiron • M-Zone Distortion • Maxoff 808 • MCMLXXXI Drv • OD 250
  (all) • Plus Distortion • Rat Distortion • Shred Distortion • Sonic
  Drive • Suhr Riot (all) • Super OD • T808 (all) • Timothy (all) • Tone
  of Kings • TS9DX (all) • Valve Screamer VS9 • Zen Master

Input Boost in Amp block

The Amp block includes an Input Boost option. This feature allows
boosting an Amp model without requiring an additional Drive block,
resulting in less overall CPU usage. A selection of Drive models,
including T808, T808 Mod, Super OD, Full OD, AC Boost, Shimmer, FAS
Boost, Treble Boost, Mid Boost and RCB Boost, is available. These boosts
are NOT 100% equivalents of the Drive block. Instead, they act as clean
boosts, replicating the oft used “Drive on 0, adjust Level as desired”
boost technique. They do not include the clipping gain of the Drive
block types, just the EQ curves.

Some Input Boost types are available in the Amp block only, with no
Drive block equivalent, such as Neutral, Grinder, CC Boost and Shred
Boost.

The Boost Level parameter controls the amount of boost, up to 24dB.

Read “Input Boost” for more information.

Parameters

Mix

Unlike other effect blocks, 0% Mix in a Drive block is not equivalent to
100% dry signal passing through ("true bypass"), because clean level can
still pass through the virtual diodes (controlled by the Dry Level
parameter).

  FRACTAL AUDIO QUOTES

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [18] The models let clean through even with the mix at 100%. It
    depends on the diodes though as to how much clean is mixed. Our
    models are based on the most common versions.

    [19] The mix control in the Drive block controls the ratio of clean
    to dirty in the distortion stage. It's not the same as the standard
    mix control in the other effects.

The Mix parameter operates prior to any tone control. This lets you mix
dry signal with the distorted signal and still maintain overall tone
control. Some users lower Mix to increase transparency and attack.

Dry Level

The Dry Level parameter in diode/opamp-based drive types (current
firmware) determines the amount of clean level that passes through the
diodes. Said differently, it controls the amount of “dry” signal mixed
with the “wet” (distorted) signal. For a Tube Screamer-based model this
will default to 100% due to the topology. For other types this will
default to 0. Values up to 200% are allowed. Note that the dry data is
added before any tone controls and therefore is not exactly equivalent
to a mix but rather replicates the behavior of analog circuits.

  From the Axe-FX III v3.02 firmware update release notes

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    [20] If the Dry level defaults to 100% then it's a Tube Screamer
    derivative. Tube Screamers use a non-inverting op-amp configuration
    with diodes in the feedback loop. This results in a transfer
    function that is Y = X + f(X) where f(X) is the distortion response.
    IOW they mix the dry signal with a distorted signal.

Bass Response, Low Cut

  (firmware 13) The “Bass Response” control exists for types based on
  the Rat, Tube Screamer and various derivates. In some models this is
  duplicated on the Basic page as it is the Bass/Voice/etc. control.
  This function was previously provided by the Low Cut control. The Low
  Cut control is now a separate control that allows adjusting the input
  highpass frequency.

Low Cut is pre-gain. High Cut is post gain.

Sample Rate

Use Sample Rate Reduction to intentionally allow aliasing, for creative
effects.

Tip: assign the parameter to an expression pedal.

Bit Reduce

This intentionally lowers the resolution of the signal (“lo-fi”).

Slew

This probably refers to how fast the circuit can swing its output. If
the signal to be amplified is too fast, the circuit will not be able to
perform properly, only amplifying signals below the slew rate limit.
Poor slew rate results in high frequencies not passing through the
amplifier, and thereby limiting or muting high harmonics.

The Pro Co RAT is known for its poor slew rate, because of the LM308
op-amp being used. See the ElectroSmash analysis in “Pro Co Rat
Analysi”.

From Wikipedia's “Slew Rate” article:

  In electronic musical instruments, slew circuitry or
  software-generated slew functions are used deliberately to provide a
  portamento (also called glide or lag) feature, where an initial
  digital value or analog control voltage is slowly transitioned to a
  new value over a period of time (see interpolation).

  Slew-induced distortion (SID or slew-rate induced distortion) is
  caused when an amplifier or transducer is required to change output
  (or displacement), i.e. slew rate, faster than it is able to do so
  without error. At such times any other signals may suffer considerable
  gain distortion, leading to intermodulation distortion. Transient
  intermodulation distortion may involve some degree of SID and/or
  distortion due to peak compression.

From Wikipedia's “Slew-induced distortion” article:

  Slew-induced distortion (SID or slew-rate induced distortion) is
  caused when an amplifier or transducer is required to change output
  (or displacement), i.e. slew rate, faster than it is able to do so
  without error. At such times any other signals may suffer considerable
  gain distortion, leading to intermodulation distortion.[1] Transient
  intermodulation distortion may involve some degree of SID and/or
  distortion due to peak compression.

Firmware Ares 10.01 for the Axe-Fx III:

  Changed Drive block Slew Limit to Slew Rate and updated default value
  of the models. Existing presets will be updated to the new default
  value upon recall. Note that the parameter now controls the slew rate
  and lower values equal less high frequency response at high amplitudes
  and vice-versa (the action is reversed from the previous firmware
  versions).

Graphic EQ

The EQ can be placed either PRE or POST distortion.

The EQ is reset when changing the Drive type.

Oversampling

Firmware 32.02 and later.

When set to HIGH, the oversampling rate is doubled which results in less
aliasing. This increases CPU usage considerably.

Tips, tricks and troubleshooting

Yek's Guide to the Fractal Audio Drive models

Forum member Yek (Alexander van Engelen) discusses the Drive models in
his "Guide to the Fractal Audio Drive Models" (PDF file).

The guide was preceded by threads on Fractal Audio's User Forum.

There are two versions of the guide:

- July 2022, for Axe-Fx III, FM9 and FM3
- November 2018, for Axe-Fx III prior to firmware 3.02, and Axe-Fx II,
  FX8, AX8

Yek stopped updating the PDF guide after 2022 and ported the contents to
this wiki page.

[Titlepage.jpg] [Contentpage.jpg]

Electronics

Partly derived from the book “Pedal Crush – Stompbox Effects For
Creative Music Making”:

A transistor is a semiconductor that amplifies the input signal and can
clip the signal into distortion. It’s a compact alternative to vacuum
tubes. Early germanium transistors were very unreliable. Silicon
transistors provide more reliable and consistent performance.

A capacitator stores electrical energy and used for various purposes
such as filtering frequencies or blocking interference.

A resistor reduces current flow and it used to control signal levels,
voltage etc.

A diode is a non-amplifying semiconductor that can clip the signal into
distortion. Low-gain germanium diodes have a softer and woolly sound,
silicon diodes generate higher gain and hard clipping.

Besides performing as on/off lights, LEDs are diodes that can clip the
signal. Every color has different characteristics.

An inductor is a coil of wire that creates a magnetic field. Used in Wah
pedals to voice the effect.

An IC is an Integrated Circuit (chip) that contains transistors,
resistors, capacitators etc.

An op-amp, AKA “Operational Amplifier” is an IC that's capable of louder
clean amplification than a transistor, using diodes to clip the signal
into distortion when needed.

These YouTube videos have more information:

- 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS)
- Busting the myth of magic op-amps and diodes? (Wampler)
- What do all the parts do on a guitar pedal? (Wampler)
- Transistors Explained (The Engineering Mindset)
- Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects

Factory presets

Many factory presets contain one or more Drive blocks. Search the
Factory presets page.

Choose and tweak

The sound of a drive type depends heavily on the chain, starting with
the guitar and pickup. The type of amp and cabinet and amount of amp
gain matter too. Fender amplifiers and Tube Screamer match so well
because the pedal’s mid hump compensates for the mid-scooped frequency
curve of these amplifiers. A RAT sounds better through a VOX than a
Fender. A Fuzz Face sounds great through a Marshall because those
amplifiers can manage the bass overload from the pedal. Some drives are
designed to tighten up high gain amplifiers, some drives are meant to
turn clean amps into blazing metal monsters, etc.

Depending on the Drive type, controls may do nothing or are highly
sensitive. Always explore their entire range and their interaction.
Examples:

- A low Drive setting with a high Level setting may sound better than
  just cranking Drive.
- A Bass or Treble control may need to be set to an extreme setting
  instead of just noon, because its acts as a “cut” control.

Tighten the sound

A Drive block before the Amp block, with minimal gain, will tighten the
low end of dirty amp tones. It also allows turning down gain in the Amp
block. This works well in particular with Tube Screamer-based Drive
types.

Alternatively, use a PEQ block, set to Blocking, and copy-and-paste High
Cut and Low Cut values from a favorite Drive type. This will apply the
same coloring as the drive, without the gain and CPU usage.

Alternatively, use the Input Boost in the Amp block itself, see above.

Turn Amp into Drive

Some manufacturers of guitar amplifiers build pedals that sound like
their signature amplifiers, such as EVH 5150, Friedman BE-OD, Bogner
Ecstasy Blue and Red, Bogner Uberschall, Diezel Zerrer. You can
accomplish a similar thing in Fractal Audio’s modelers by changing an
Amp model into a Drive model.

It's a simple procedure, simply turn off Power Amp Modeling in the amp
block. Current firmware provides a switch for this and expands the
inventory of drives and requires less CPU usage than a dedicated Drive
block. It’s especially handy in the Axe-Fx series and FM9 with their
dual amp blocks. AX8 and FM3 owners can take advantage of this as well,
in combination with a real amp.

More information is in:

- The forum “Want the MXR 5150 Overdrive pedal? You got it already.”
  discussion
- Leon Todd's video tutorial “Using Amps as Drives”

This is something done with real amps too. Randy Bachman used a similar
trick with his amplifiers; “The Audience Was Going Nuts. They Could Feel
the Electricity Happening”: Randy Bachman Reveals How a Broken Guitar
String Led to the Guess Who’s 1970 Smash “American Woman”

    I got the sound with my Les Paul plugged into what I called the
    Herzog: two Garnet amps made by [Garnet founder] Gar Gillies, with
    one used as a preamp.

Turn Drive into Amp

With some creativity, you can replace an Amp block with a Drive block.
It will not sound fantastic, and it will lack dynamics, but it lets you
bypass the single amp block limitation of the AX8 and FM3.

- Demonstration
- Simulating an amp and a cabinet, without an Amp block or Cab block

Add gain to high notes

Attach Pitch (internal controller) to the Drive parameter and use Slope
in the modifier menu to fine-tune. This will increase or lower gain
depending on the pitch of the played note. Finetune the modifier
settings for precise control.

More information is in:

- hippietim's comment in “Quick first impressions of the Axe-Fx III” in
  the forum
- Leon Todd's “5 Minute Tones - The Pitch Follower Modifier” video
  tutorial

The factory preset “Pitch Follower” demonstrates this.

Disable diode clipping

To disable diode clipping, set Diode Quantity to 4 and select one of the
LED types. [21]

Warm up or soften a synth

A Drive type, especially the RAT, can be put before a Synth block to
warm up or soften the synth sound.

Tape Distortion for vintage flavor

The Tape Distortion type, either before or after the Amp block, can add
a vintage flavor to the sound.

Distortion from the Cab block

The Cab block's preamp page provides tools to simulate clipping from mic
preamps, channel strips and tape.

Read this: “Preamp simulation”

Dynamic Distortion block

Read “Dynamic Distortion block” for more information.

Stack multiple drives

Multiple drives can be stacked. Examples:

- two T808s (like SRV)
- two Face Fuzz models
- Octave Distortion followed by Face Fuzz
- Face Fuzz followed by Treble Booster

Ring modulator into fuzz

Put a tracking ring modulator before a fuzz. Example: “Ring Fuzz” scene
in the “BLANKENSHIP LEEDS” factory preset.

Clone other pedals and devices

Note: because of ever evolving firmware, suggested settings in the links
below may not be accurate anymore.

- EHX Soul Food
- AA Workhorse
- Solo Dallas Schaffer Replica pedal, more information
- Xotic EP Booster
- Roger Mayer Axis Fuzz
- Boss HM-2
- Cornish SS2
- JHS Superbolt
- Mesa Grid Slammer

PEQ instead of Drive

A PEQ block can deliver the characteristic EQ curve of a drive pedal
without its gain or sculpt the soul of an Amp model.

To get that ‘80s nasal hard rock tone: put a Peaking PEQ before a Plexi
amp model, and add 5 to 7dB at 1000 Hz.

To approach the sound of a Klon try these settings:

- band 1 Shelving2, 150 Hz, 0.707, -12
- band 5 Shelving2, 2253 Hz, 0.707, -12, Level 1.5

Drive models

Leon Todd demonstrates various Drive types in “FM3 3.03b - New Drives,
UltraRes IR's & More”.

The following is a list of Fractal Audio's Drive models and the original
devices on which these are based.

VP4: the list of drives on the VP4 is shorter because some drive models
on the VP4 are consolidated.

77 CUSTOM OD (MXR M77 Custom Badass Modified O.D.)

[Badass.jpg]

From MXR'S Custom Badass Series, a classic overdrive circuit that's been
upgraded with a 100HZ control and a Bump switch for improved performance
and versatility.

The sound is similar to an SD-1.

Controls: Tone, Output, 100HZ cut/boost, Gain and Bump switch (alternate
EQ voicing that boosts the lows and mids, like a Tube Screamer).

  "The Bump switch adds 5 dB of boost at 300 Hz. The Mid control is
  already set to do this. Turn the Mid control up to 7.4." Fractal Audio

Premier Guitar article

    MXR • Audiofanzine • Prymaxe • Boss SD-1 vs MXR M77

ANGRY CHUCK (JHS Angry Charlie V3)

[JHSPedalsAngryCharlieV3.jpg]

This pedal/model aims to produce the sound of a Marshall JCM800, a
so-called amp-in-a-box. The jury is still out to decide if the pedal's
sound really compares to a JCM800, but it's a popular pedal anyway.

Andy Timmons used to use one to get his overdriven aggressive sounds.
Later he worked with JHS Pedals to create his signature AT overdrive
pedal, which is based on the Angry Charlie circuit.

Fractal Audio modeled the red V3 version, which added the three-band
tone stack and U-shaped knob layout and has a little more headroom.

"The Angry Charlie has become a staple of the JHS line over the years,
and it’s a force to be reckoned with in the high-gain pedal territory.
Its ability to convincingly and accurately breathe JCM800 tones into any
rig has made it a popular choice for guitarists of all genres. And
unlike many other British amp-in-a-box pedals, the Angry Charlie V3
sports a 3-band tone stack, just like the Marshalls, helping nail those
warm yet searing tones and boundless sustain. If you are a glutton for
high-gain overdrive/distortion that has a British flavor, the Angry
Charlie V3 will change your life. Well, your gear life." JHS

  "A drive pedal that is marketed as sounding like a JCM800 but is
  really just another MI Audio Crunchbox / Suhr Riot / etc. derivative
  which can all trace their lineage back to the Marshall Bluesbreaker."
  Fractal Audio

Controls are Drive, Volume, Bass, Middle and Treble. The tone controls
are active. According to JHS, Drive and Volume control interact the same
as a master volume amp head.

At low gain settings, the sound is a bit bluesy. Turn it up and it
becomes aggressive.

    JHS• Riffs, Beards & Gear • That Pedal Show • gearmanndude • Martial Allart

BB PRE (Xotic BB preamp)

[X BB.jpg]

Original forum thread

Xotic is an American company known for its quality effects, such as the
BB preamp, RC Booster, AC Booster, EP Booster and Robotalk, as well as
its guitars and basses. Some say “BB” is an abbreviation of
“Bluesbreaker”, Marshall’s vintage 2x12 combo amp, used by Eric Clapton
in John Mayall’s Bluesbreakers (read more about it in Yeks Guide to the
Fractal Audio Amp Models. But it doesn't sound like it is. Others say it
means “Big British”. It's a diode-based pedal with a preamp gain stage
that can turn a pristine clean amp into a well-behaved overdriven
version. It also smoothens and compresses an already overdriven tone.
While the pedal doesn’t sound like a Tube Screamer (there’s no mid-hump)
and has much more gain, it is partly based on that circuit. Like all
drive types, its sound depends on the amp it’s being used with. The
pedal gained popularity after Andy Timmons made it his main boost pedal
(before switching to MI Audio and JHS). Xotic built him a signature
edition. Xotic released several versions of the pedal, with varying
amounts of compression as described on Guitar Tone Overload. The pedal
is still being manufactured (version 1.5, $170) and remains a popular
choice. Around 2017 Xotic reissued an earlier version of the pedal
(limited edition), named BB preamp AT (AT = Andy Timmons).

  "The BB Preamp offers a wide variety of sounds. It’s capable of a
  30dB+ clean boost with an adjustable ±15dB two band active EQ which
  adds a wide range of harmonic content to your ideal sound. The BB also
  utilizes a pre-gain stage which allows the pedal to go from a very
  pristine clean to a very smooth, compressed, overdriven sound." Xotic

The pedal has Gain, Volume, Bass and Treble knobs. The tone controls are
active, cutting or boosting up to 15dB.

Fractal Audio provides two models. One is based on the BB preamp 1.5.
The other one on the BB preamp AT.

  "The BB is more of a clean boost it's just pushing the amp (model)."
  Fractal Audio

At default settings into a clean amp, the models replicate an overdriven
amp. A moderate Drive setting works well for the amp-in-a-box sound. Set
Gain close to 0 and turn up Level to tighten an already overdriven amp
or boost a clean amp. The model is featured in some factory presets,
search this wiki page for “BB Pre”. If you like the character of the BB
Pre model, but prefer a thicker type of sound, try the Esoteric ACB
model, based on Xotic’s AC Booster pedal (now discontinued).

    Andy Timmons • J.D. Simo • Dave Weiner • ProGuitarShop (Strat) •  ProGuitarShop (Les Paul) • Sam Vilo • Prymaxe: BB Pre • Prymaxe: BB Pre AT • Guitar Sanctuary Featuring Andy Timmons • D’Addario Sound Advice: Andy Timmons • Mike Hermans: BB Pre AT • The Tone Lounge

BB PRE AT (Xotic BB preamp AT)

See above.

[BB-AT.jpg]

BENDER FUZZ (Sola Sound / Vox Tone Bender)

[X Bender.gif]

Original forum thread

The classic Tone Bender fuzz originates from the ‘60s and was designed
and manufactured by Macari’s / Sola Sound in the UK. The Tone Bender
name was used for their series of fuzz boxes. Sola Sound and Vox Tone
Benders are basically the same thing because the Sola design was
licensed to JMI/Vox. Sola Sound also built the Colorsound range of
effects, including the famous wah pedal, the Power Boost and the
Overdriver (also provided as models) and several different versions of
the Tone Bender. Jimmy Page used a Tone Bender when recording Led
Zeppelin’s Whole Lotta Love, as demonstrated in the documentary “It
Might Get Loud“. The Beatles, Jeff Beck in The Yardbirds and Eric
Clapton have used it too.

According to Wikipedia, the first Tone Bender design (MK1) was based on
the Maestro fuzz and contained three transistors. The second edition,
later named MK1.5, had two transistors and was a negative feedback
amplifier; the Arbiter Fuzz Face and Vox/JMI Tone Bender are based on
it. The Professional MKII edition contained three transistors again; it
was a MK1.5 model with an additional gain stage, and probably is the
most popular and most-copied design. The MKIII (the inspiration for
Fulltone’s Soul-Bender) had an additional tone control and was followed
by the MKIV. There are many clones on the market. The Colorsound “Supa”
Tone Bender (1973) used silicon transistors and was based on the “Ram’s
Head” Big Muff.

  "The Tone Bender MKI.5 is said to be the first circuit type used in
  any Sola Sound sand cast enclosure and the only Tone Bender made with
  two germanium transistors. So sonically what can you expect? The tone
  is a little heavier and denser when compared to that of the
  Professional MKII. Has some of that beefy woolliness of a good
  germanium Fuzz Face but still has enough cut and shove to not
  completely loose it in the mix. The saturation levels are lower too so
  works pretty neat for driving a big ballsy amplifier over the edge but
  never to the extent that things completely fall apart.

  Some would say that it all about the place it holds in the world of
  rock’n’roll. When I demo a MKII in the shop these days I am still
  blown away by the sound – for me it is the epitome of great guitar
  tone – loads of headroom, warm fat crunch through to aggressive rock
  tones suitable for downtuning, then back off your volume and there are
  all those huge blues tones. That’s today... what it must have been
  like back in 1964 I can only imagine – It must have been like a
  spaceship landing – most people walking into Macaris back then would
  have only heard a fuzzbox on record – this pedal played through an old
  Marshall or Selmer or Vox – well, for a guitarist, it must have been
  life changing." Macari's

Many clones and replicas exist. D*A*M Stompboxes still builds authorized
authentic reissues. BOSS in collaboration with Sola Sound released the
Waza Craft TB-2W Tone Bender, a limited edition reissue of the MK II
fuzz-pedaal, which costed over $300 when released, and goes for much
higher now.

  “The first commercially made fuzz box to hit the UK market was the
  golden coloured, wedge shaped; three transistorized Gary Hurst
  designed Tone Bender. The Tone Bender was released in September 1965
  and sold for 14 guineas, approximately £185 in today’s worth. The Tone
  Bender was a big hit and quickly drew big name players to a growing
  rank of users. The Yardbirds, The Who, The Pretty Things, The
  Merseybeats, The Ivy League and a rather popular band from Liverpool
  called the Beatles were among users of the Tone Bender. Guitar player
  with a Hull based band called the Rats also used this original Tone
  Bender as his primary fuzz sound for many years. This Guitar player
  was Mick Ronson who as we know went on to play lead guitar alongside a
  certain David Bowie. This first incarnation of the Tone Bender was
  only made for a relativity short time period before the design of the
  pedal was significantly changed.

  Following the success of this first Tone Bender, which we will refer
  to as the MKI, it was clear that the design of the pedal needed to be
  geared towards being a more readily produced item. Early in 1966 a new
  improved Tone Bender arrived on the scene, this version of the Tone
  Bender has become known as the MKI.5. This new design was much more
  modern & futuristic in appearance and was also more ergonomic in its
  aesthetics, more space ship like in appearance than the tank like
  appearance of the MKI. The new improved Tone Bender enclosure was
  manufactured using a sand casting process and was finished in a
  silver/grey hammertone paint. The new Tone Bender was, like its
  predecessor, named only as a ‘Tone Bender’. The silk screening on the
  enclosure only featured the pedals name; the labelling for the
  controls and the input & output sockets, no company information was
  featured.

  The internal construction style of the MKI.5 is of the same style that
  followed through into the build technique of the MKII’s. The MKI.5
  utilised isolated jack sockets as to avoid ground loops, a feature
  used on all Tone Benders and most other quality British made effect
  pedals from the 1960’s. A technique unfortunately that is seldom used
  today. All the early Tone Benders, right up to the introduction of the
  MKIII, also relied heavily on the use of shielded cabling throughout.
  Again, a very good construction technique and yet again little seen in
  use today. Interesting side note, true bypass switching that is often
  seen as a modern feature to ‘boutique’ builders was actually first
  seen used in the Tone Bender MKI.

  The earliest MKI.5 Tone Bender I seen featured two IMPEX S3-1T
  Germanium transistors. Possibly have been prototype unit? Commonly the
  MKI.5 along with a large percentage of MKII Tone Benders used the
  British made Mullard OC75’s. The two transistor arrangement of this
  type of circuit is called a voltage feedback biasing circuit.
  Interestingly, several fuzz boxes that first made their appearance in
  the year 1966 used this very same set-up. The Arbiter Fuzz Face, the
  Vox Tone Bender, Vox Distortion Booster and the Sola Sound made Tone
  Bender MKI.5. Possibly a happy coincidence? But more likely inspired
  by the popularity of the originator." D*A*M Stompboxes

Tone Bender Timeline • The History of the Great Fuzz Pedals • Premier
Guitar's Face the Fuzz: A Beginner’s and Skeptic’s Guide to Fuzz Pedals
• Premier Guitar's Fifty Years of Filth: The Story Of The Mighty Bender
Fuzz • Rhett Shull: Macari shop story • Brief History of Fuzz • ToneHome

The most popular Tone Bender designs are simple pedals with just two
knobs: Attack (amount of fuzz, Drive in the model) and Level.

  "The Tonebender has a lot of treble boost. If you're using it with a
  modern, heavy-sounding amp it will sound like cr*p. It works best with
  vintage, dark amps like the Class-A. It was originally designed to
  complement the British amps of that era which were very dark. Put it
  in front of the Class A model and it sounds killer.” [22]

So. far, it’s unknown which circuit has been modeled by Fractal Audio.
But it doesn’t really matter: the Bender Fuzz model sounds great. While
real Tone Bender pedals contain germanium transistors, the Clip Type
parameter in the model is set to “Hard”, representing the circuit’s hard
clipping. It is a versatile fuzz model. It can be used with a clean amp,
where it will sound punchy, or with an amp with a lot of power amp
distortion (e.g. Plexi), capable of filling the room and flooring the
audience, making modern high-gain amps hide sheepishly in a corner. It
can even be used with amps with lots of preamp gain, and with bass
guitar. At high Drive settings, notes on the low E-string get spitty,
like an imminent implosion to happen. Dialing in the model is as simple
as putting it before or after a clean or slightly dirty Marshall amp
model, turning the Drive control to the desired position, and using the
guitar’s volume knob to control the amount of fuzz. Turn up Drive and
Level for crushing distortion, reminiscent of Ian Thornley of Big Wreck.
For a milder fuzz tone, turn down Drive. For more information about the
interaction between the guitar and fuzz models, refer to the notes
earlier on this page. The model is featured in some factory presets,
search this wiki page for “Bender”.

    Sola Sound Tone Bender • Macari’s: Tonebender • Which JMI Tone Bender is Right For Me • MKII Tone Bender • Ramble FX Twin Bender Fuzz (Pete Thorn) • Original 1973 Tone Bender • MKI Tone Bender (British Pedal Company) • MKII Tone Bender (British Pedal Company) • MKI.5 Tone Bender (British Pedal Company) • MKIII Tone Bender (British Pedal Company) • The Best Fuzz Pedal I’ve Ever Played (Rhett Shull) • My Most Valuable Pedals (JHS) • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • 10 Rare Pedals (JHS) • The First Guitar Effects Ever (JHS) • How to Find the Fuzz Pedal You Need (JHS) • Colorsound Supa Tonebender • Is The BOSS Waza Tonebender Worth It? (JHS)

BIT CRUSHER (custom model)

[Logo.jpg]

Original forum thread

Bit crushing is the process of intentionally downgrading audio quality,
to create a warm sound or as an effect by itself. A bit-crushing pedal
or software plugin often provides bit reduction and sample rate
controls, and more. Fractal Audio’s Bit Crusher model is not modeled
after a specific pedal, although such pedals do exist. If you don’t use
the model’s bit reduction and sample rate controls, a generic drive
remains.

  "Based on a black box we found lying in the trash outside Studio
  Harshclip." Owner's Manual

The model at default settings showcases the Bit Reduce control. In fact,
this control appears in every Drive type, so it’s not limited to this
specific model. It lets you reduce the resolution (dynamic range) of the
digital signal. This creates artifacts, a stair-stepping effect and
distortion. Its value is the number of bits that will be subtracted from
24-bit full scale. For example, to create 4-bit audio, set it to 20
(default value in this model). Be aware that bit reduction will
introduce background hiss and will cause the signal to drop out. The
model already does this at default settings.

  “Samples in digital audio are recorded as integers or floating-point
  (real) numbers stored in computer memory. Those numbers are encoded
  using a series of on and off memory bits. The larger the number of
  bits, the more accurately a sample encodes the instantaneous volume
  level of a sampled audio waveform. DAWs today typically use 32-bit
  floating-point numbers. Early digital audio gear and video games used
  8-bit integer samples or less. Roland's classic TR-909 drum machine
  used 6-bit integer samples. Resolution reduction intentionally reduces
  the number of bits used for audio samples. As the bit depth goes down,
  waveforms become more stair-stepped and subtle volume variations are
  lost. At extreme bit reduction, waveforms are reduced to clicks as a
  waveform jumps abruptly from low to high and back again without
  intervening values.” Wikipedia

Another way to intentionally downgrade signal quality is to use the
Sample Rate control. This control also appears in every Drive model. It
introduces digital aliasing by reducing the sample rate from 48kHz all
the way to 48Hz. This also creates digital artifacts and messes up
pitch.

  “Digital audio is composed of a rapid series of numeric samples that
  encode the changing volume of an audio waveform. To accurately
  represent a smooth waveform, digital audio requires many samples at a
  high sample rate. The higher the rate, the more accurate the waveform.
  Higher sample rates also allow higher frequencies to be accurately
  encoded. DAWs today typically use 44.1 kHz or higher sample rates.
  Early digital gear used much lower sample rates to conserve memory for
  stored audio. Sample rate reduction (also called down-sampling)
  intentionally reduces the sample rate to degrade the quality of the
  audio. As the sample rate is reduced, waveforms become more coarse and
  high frequencies are lost. At extreme reductions, the waveform becomes
  metallic sounding.” Wikipedia

Pedal Crush – Stompbox Effects For Creative Music Making

Tips:

- Run the Looper when experimenting with Bit Reduce and Sample Rate.
  Record a clip, set it to playback, then go wild with the controls
- Attach the Sequencer (internal controller) to a parameter in the Synth
  block and run it through the Bit Crusher model
- Attach an expression pedal to Sample Rate

If you like lo-fi sounds, consider these alternatives:

- Lower the low and high sliders in a GEQ block
- Use the IR of a tiny speaker cabinet
- Crank Speaker Drive in the Amp block
- Crank Drive and Saturation in the Cab block’s Preamp simulation
- Use the Ring Modulator block in non-tracking mode
- Use low-pass and high-pass filtering
- Generate pink or white noise with the Synth block

    Sample rates: The Higher The Better, Right? • Battle Of The Bitcrushers • BitCrusher III • Red Panda Bitmap

BLACKGLASS 7K (Darkglass Microtubes B7K)

[x_B7K.png]

Original forum thread

Referred by its manufacturer Darkglass Electronics as the “Black Beast”,
this Scandinavian analog bass preamp and overdrive (big brother of the
B3K model) is famous for its overdrive, transparency and versatility and
is very popular, either as a standalone preamp or as a distortion pedal.
It covers the spectrum from crystal clear powerful tones to modern
crushing bass distortion.

  “Tone crushing overdrive and super transparent modern sound is the
  essence of the B7K. One of the most acclaimed Darkglass pedals in the
  bass community, it doesn ́t compromise the original sound of the
  instrument, but it enhances its presence in the mix.” B7K Manual

  “The Microtubes B7K takes the powerful dynamic saturation circuit of
  the B3K and adds a four-band equalizer and a balanced line driver for
  even greater versatility. Designed for both studio and live use, it
  will take your direct sound to a whole new level.” Darkglass

Gitarre & Bass (German)

Controls on the original pedal: Blend (mixes clean signal with
overdriven signal), Level, Drive and four EQ knobs: Low (100Hz), Low
Mids (1 kHz), Hi Mids (2.8 kHz), Treble (5 kHz). The Attack switch
controls the amount of treble content to saturate and provides these
options:

- Boost: emphasizes treble content
- Flat: neutral
- Cut: de-emphasizes treble content

The Grunt switch controls the amount of low frequency content to
saturate before the clipping stage and provides these options:

- Fat
- Thin
- Raw

Fractal Audio’s hard-clipping model is based on the original B7K pedal,
not the later Ultra and V2 editions. But because Fractal Audio includes
a GEQ in every Drive block, the model already goes beyond the pedal on
which it is based. Just like the real thing, Fractal Audio’s model can
be used either with and without Amp and/or Cab blocks. According to
Fractal Audio, the model has been created with the Attack and Grunt
switches in the middle position. The Grunt switch changes the low-cut
frequency. The Grunt control in the model is the same as the Low Cut
control. The Attack switch controls a shelving filter on the input.
Note: early versions of the model were not 100% accurate because of
issues with the modeled device.

    demo • Darkglass • Chris Kollias • demo • demo

BLUES OD (Marshall Bluesbreaker Mk1)

[X BBmk1.png]

Original forum thread

In the ‘60s, Eric Clapton reportedly played through a very loud Marshall
JTM 45 combo when recording John Mayall’s famous “Beano” album. This amp
became known as the Bluesbreaker. Read more about it in the Yeks Guide
to the Fractal Audio Amp Models. In the ‘90s, Marshall released the
Bluesbreaker pedal (BB), designed to replicate this sound. It was part
of a series that also contained the Shredmaster and the Drivemaster
pedals. It’s a light-to-moderate soft-clipping overdrive, totally
different from the ubiquitous Tube Screamer sound. The Bluesbreaker
pedal into a Fender enters Plexi terrritory. John Mayer ran his
Bluesbreaker into a Klon.

There are Mk 1 and Mk 2 versions, with Mk 2 providing more gain. A later
edition of the pedal, the Bluesbreaker BB-2 (no space in the middle of
its name), is far less appreciated. Builders such as JHS (Morning
Glory), Wampler (Pantheon) and Robert Keeley have designed pedals based
on the original Bluesbreaker circuit. Analog Man’s very popular King of
Tone is available as a separate Fractal Audio model. Read Wampler's
blog. In 2023 Marshall released a series of reissues including the
Bluesbreaker.

More information: Gitarre & Bass (German) • Tonehome

The pedal has three knobs: Gain, Tone, and Volume. Gain and Volume must
be set pretty high to sufficient gain and output level from the pedal.
John Mayer sets all controls on the pedal to 3 o'clock, reportedly.

Fractal Audio‘s corresponding model is the Blues OD. So, to be clear:
the Blues OD is NOT a model of the BOSS Blues Driver pedalFractal
Audio’s BB Pre model, modeled after Xotic’s BB preamp, also references
Marshall’s Bluesbreaker amp, but sounds very different. The Blues OD
model can put out cutting juicy blues tones with simple adjustments. The
sound varies with the type of Amp model it runs into: clean,
on-the-verge-of-breakup, Fender, Marshall, etc. Set Gain between 1 and 4
o’clock for a mean blues tone. Keep Tone low because the sound gets
easily piercing. The model is featured in some factory presets, search
this wiki page for “Blues OD”.

  "One of the more impressive circuits is the BluesBreaker. Whoever
  designed that knew what he was doing. It's unique and the designer
  understood the role of resistance in series with the diodes.” Fractal
  Audio

    TheToneShack • Premier Guitar's John Mayer Rig Rundown • The Story of Marshall Blues Breaker (ToneJunkie) • Worth The Hype? (Friday Fretworks) • What Is A Blues Breaker? (JHS) • Marshall’s Greatest Pedals (JHS) • Marshall Blues Breaker Style Overdrive Pedals: The Current Faves (That Pedal Show) • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • Marshall Vintage Reissue Pedals • The Best Reissue Pedals Ever Made? (Andertons) • The Best Reissue Pedals Ever Made? (Andertons) • Pedal Pawn • Sweetwater • Marshall Blues Breaker or Boss Blues Driver (That Pedal Show)

BOSOM BOOST (Friedman Buxom Boost)

[Buxom.jpg]

Guitar amplification guru Dave Friedman of Friedman Amplification also
builds pedals. The Buxom Boost is his take on clean boosts. It pushes a
pure and clean tone to the front of the amp.

Tone knobs on the pedal are: Mid, Bass, Treble (boosts/cuts). The EQ
switch removes the EQ for more transparency. The Tight control tightens
the bottom end. Boost controls the output level. With Boost at zero, the
model doesn't pass signal, just like the original pedal.

When looking into clean boosts, don't overlook this model's VERY low CPU
usage.

  "Actual pedal doesn't have a Level control so the default is 10."
  Fractal Audio

    Shawn Tubbs • Pete Thorn • John is just too loud • Tone Wars

BOX O'CRUNCH (MI Audio Crunch Box V1)

[X Crunchbox.jpg]

Original forum thread

Many manufacturers have tried to capture the essential sound of a tube
amplifier in a pedal. John Suhr did it with the Riot pedal. Another
company that succeeded, is MI Audio. Their Crunch Box Distortion pedal
is one of the most popular amp-in-a-box pedals, providing the straight
in-to-your-face blistering “Marshall on stereoids” sound, with prominent
mids, feedback and all. It’s been said that the Crunch Box is based on
Marshall’s Guvnor (Guv’nor) pedal (1989). The current model is the Super
Crunch Box V2. Like the Guvnor, the Crunch Box uses LED (light-emitting
diode) clipping. Yes, those little ed lights can be used for intentional
signal clipping, creating distortion. LEDs have a lot of headroom and
are less fizzy and louder than other diodes. The Crunch Box itself has
inspired other manufacturers (e.g. Suhr's Riot pedal, also modeled by
Fractal Audio). The JHS Pedals Angry Charlie series, responsible for
Andy Timmons' overdriven sound these days, is very similar.

  “I had one goal in mind with this pedal, namely to create a pedal
  which captures the huge crunch of a Marshall on steroids. I am VERY
  happy with the results. Simple and straight forward, with just gain,
  tone and volume. The Crunch Box has some similarities to the Tube
  Zone, in the sense that the design is based on a multiple clipping
  architecture (the signal is clipped 3 times). However, there are
  significant differences which make these two pedals sound quite
  different from each other. The Tube Zone is designed to have a very
  'broad' sonic footprint. The Crunch Box on the other hand has a strong
  mid-presence to it, similar to the great British amps. Also, the
  Crunch Box has a relationship with the Blues Pro, since the tone
  shaping is similar to the Blues Pro. The results are really quite
  spectacular. In the lower gain range, the tone is very punchy and
  throaty. There are some great classic rock rhythm sounds to be found
  in there. As the gain is wound up, the Crunch Box develops a beautiful
  singing lead tone. The tone is shaped in a way which makes the pedal
  very touch sensitive, and variations in picking technique produce a
  very big difference on tone. Pinch harmonics are a breeze. I have put
  in there more gain than anyone should need, but due to the way I
  handled the pre-overdrive tone shaping, the pedal always stays tight
  and each pickup retains its character, including single coils.” MI
  Audio (Crunch Box V3 manual)

Gitarre & Bass: Andy Timmons Sound (German)

The pedal has three knobs: Gain (model: Distortion), Tone (cuts highs),
and Vol.

Fractal Audio’s model is based on the first version of the Crunch Box,
now discontinued. The first version of the pedal, modeled by Fractal
Audio, is not as bright as later versions, so you’ll probably want to
keep Tone cranked (Tone cuts treble). Start with low Drive, Tone at 10
and Level turned up works well. In this video, Brett Kingman (aka Burgs)
shows how to tweak the model to sound more like the brighter Crunch Box
V2. The model is featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page
for “Crunch”.

  "The model is based on a V1.” Fractal Audio

    TheToneShack • MI Audio Crunch Box (Brett Kingman) • Box O' Crunch A/B'd with Crunch Box V2 (Brett Kingman) • Super Crunch Box (Brett Kingman) • Super Crunch Box V2 (Brett Kingman) • Haar Guitars • Super Crunch Box vs JHS Angry Charlie • ProGuitarShop • GuitarCubeChina

COLORTONE BOOSTER (Colorsound Power Boost)

[Colorsound Power Boost.jpg]

Based on the original pedal, with added Master control.

The original Power Boost was built and sold by Macari’s Musical Exchange
in the 60s. Macari's also sold the Tone Bender, see above. The Power
Boost was the predecessor to the Colorsound Overdriver and was the
inspiration for some Cornish pedals.

Dave Gilmour put his Power Boost after the Big Muff Pi, to boost and EQ
the fuzz sound. [23]

  "You should be able to get very close to a Cornish G2 by bypassing the
  tone circuit and using the High Cut as a tone control.” Fractal Audio

    Gilmourish • Pink Floyd • Gilmourish • Pedal Science • That Pedal Show • demo • Macari's

COLORTONE OD (Colorsound Overdriver)

[Colorsound Overdriver.jpg]

Based on the original pedal, with added Master control.

The Overdriver was preceded by the Colorsound Power Boost, also modeled.

    musictoyznetwork
    blondegraemy
    Macari's

COMPULSION DISTORTION HP (Fulltone OCD)

[X OCD.jpg]

Original forum thread

In 2005, Mike Fuller of Fulltone followed up on the success of the
Full-Drive (also modeled by Fractal Audio) with the best-selling
Obsessive Compulsive Drive or OCD. It’s a modern MOSFET-based overdrive
/ distortion with a very wide gain and dynamic range. It’s been said
that the OCD is inspired by Voodoo Lab’s Overdrive pedal (also modeled),
but they sound different. The OCD nails the warm sound and response of a
driven tube amp convincingly (amp-in-a-box). It was an instant hit with
guitar players, including pros such as Keith Urban, as well as bass
players. Also, the OCD has always been affordable. Fulltone released the
OCD V2 ($120) in 2017. But before that, the original OCD already had
been changed seven times by Fulltone (versions 1.1 – 1.7). The OCD
modeled by Fractal Audio probably might be version 1.4.

More information:
Music Radar • GuitarLessons • Legendary Tones • The Story of Fulltone
OCD (ToneJunkie).

Wampler's take on the OCD has a similar name to Fractal Audio's mode:
Compulsion Drive

  “The OCD was the first pedal to use Mosfets as clipping devices.
  Another first was their configuration as “hard clippers connected to
  v-ref” instead of to ground, as was the norm. These things contribute
  greatly as to why the OCD has such touch-sensitivity…why they react so
  well when the strings are hit hard or soft, and why they sound & feel
  different than all other pedals out there, 90% of which are just
  slight tweaks of the Tube Screamer.” Fulltone

  “The Fulltone Obsessive Compulsive Drive (OCD) is an extremely open
  sounding Overdrive/Distortion circuit that differs from other
  overdrives in that it has a good bit more Dynamic-Range...meaning the
  difference between picking soft or picking hard will actually yield a
  more natural and wider range of distortion (with less compression)
  than traditional diode-clipped overdrives. The OCD also creates
  complex overtones without changing the inherent tone of whatever amp
  and guitar you’re playing through, in the process lifting off that
  blanket other drive pedals can put on your signature sound. The OCD
  accomplishes its tube-like distortion through the unusual combination
  of overdriving its JFET opamp, and then hard-clipping with a pair of
  MOSFETs later on in the circuit. This topography did not exist in a
  pedal prior to the OCD, and the circuit works very well with a vast
  array of guitars and amps. Because of its large amount of available
  output volume, the OCD works great as a booster in front of amps to
  goose them into submission, as well as through Master-Volume amps to
  drive them much harder than most OD‘s can, but it also excels at
  creating its own distortion with all the chime of a Class A amp and
  its complex array of overtones. The OCD gives you the feeling that
  your amp is Cranked at even living room volume so Clean playing is
  more dynamic and dirty sounds still have the ringing overtones. The
  OCD’s can access a slew of other in-between sounds by simply turning
  up or down your guitar’s volume control, in fact, no other pedal
  “cleans up” like the OCD.” Manual

  “I think it's my favorite drive. I can see why the pedals were so
  popular.” Fractal Audio

The pedal has 3 knobs and a switch:

- Drive: amount of overdrive (model: Drive)
- Tone: controls tone, noon is neutral (model: Tone)
- Volume: output level (model: Level)
- Low Peak / High Peak: the two switch positions are represented through
  separate models

According to the manual, High Peak increases distortion throughout the
Drive knob‘s range, delivers more volume and a slight increase in the
midrange between 1-2 kHhz), for more of a “British” vibe (Vox and
Marshall). Low Peak (favoured by many owners) increases accuracy to the
original sound of the amp with very little coloration, which is good for
clean boosting and cranked Blackface or Tweed-style ones. The switch
expands the range of use of this pedal.

The Drive control covers an enormous range of gain. Low Drive and Level
turned up works great as a clean boost. Turn it up and you’ll discover
the potential of this model, from a mild crunch into high gain. It
excels at any position, and it isn’t hard to see why the pedal is so
popular. Try Drive 5, Tone 3, Level 6.5 with the LP model.

    That Pedal Show • The Story of Fulltone OCD (ToneJunkie) • Intheblues • ProGuitarShop (Les Paul) • ProGuitarShop (Strat) • Haar Guitars • 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS) • Sweetwater • Jack Fossett • Audiofanzine

COMPULSION DISTORTION LP (Fulltone OCD)

See above.

DS1 DISTORTION (BOSS DS-1 Distortion)

[X DS1.jpg]

Built like a tank, low price, and good performance: BOSS always
delivers. And the classic orange pedal still sells after its
introduction in 1978. BOSS released a 40th anniversary edition in 2018
in black and gold colors. Unlike the SD-1 (also modeled by Fractal
Audio) this is a true distortion pedal. Well-known players have used it
to turn a clean amp into mayhem (Kurt Cobain in “Smells Like Teen
Spirit”, Prince etc.), or to add more gain to an already distorted amp
(Steve Vai, Joe Satriani). The op-amp distortion isn’t particularly
tube-like, it has a hard edge, it’s aggressive and needs careful
tweaking of gain and tone to prevent the “can of bees” sound (fizzy and
harsh).

  “The DS-1 Distortion is a true icon in the world of guitar effects.
  Introduced in 1978, BOSS’s first distortion pedal defined a bold new
  sound, delivering hard-edged attack and smooth sustain that’s been a
  staple of players for generations. The DS-1 is the top-selling BOSS
  compact pedal ever, and its original, unchanged design continues to
  inspire the creation of great music everywhere. The classic DS-1 tone
  is behind the signature sounds of numerous rock legends, and is ready
  to fuel your own signature sound today. Before the DS-1, most
  distortion pedals produced harsh, buzzy tones and muddy sound at high
  gain settings. In 1978, BOSS engineers changed all that by developing
  a unique distortion circuit for the DS-1 that produces tight,
  hard-edged gain with rich harmonics while retaining the unique
  characteristics of different guitars and playing techniques. Hard
  rock, metal, and punk styles began to flourish in the ‘70s and ‘80s,
  and the DS-1’s tone had a defining influence on these genres. That
  trend has endured through multiple generations, and players around the
  world continue to seek out the classic DS-1 sound. From its modest
  three-knob interface, many different sound colors can be coaxed from
  the DS-1. Its pioneering two-stage circuit incorporates both
  transistor and op-amp gain stages. This approach is critical to the
  DS-1’s characteristic low-frequency fullness, which is loved by
  guitarists that play heavy music genres. The distortion knob offers an
  extremely wide range, from a mild boost for driving amps and pedals to
  full-throttle gain for monster rock riffs. Unlike typical tone
  controls that only cut highs, the DS-1’s tone circuit features an
  innovative design that offers far more range. Turning the knob
  clockwise increases highs and decreases lows, while going
  counter-clockwise has the opposite effect. This lets you dial in
  everything from tight, cutting rhythm sounds to smooth, fat lead
  voices. The tone control is particularly effective for maintaining
  low-end definition when using the DS-1 as a booster with vintage-style
  amps, which often sound muddy when driven with other distortion
  pedals.” BOSS

  "This is truly a classic distortion pedal. It produces a distortion
  sound with a hard edge and is known to have a very low noise level
  compared to other distortion pedals. Many people swear that the older
  “Made in Japan” models sounds better than the newer “Made in Taiwan”
  models. The DS-1 has over the years been used by a lot of great guitar
  players. Steve Vai and Joe Satriani are two players who has voiced
  their praise over this pedal. The DS-1 is also a favorite among
  modifiers. Keeley, Analogman and Stinkfoot all provide their own
  versions of this icon among distortion makers. The design of the DS-1
  has changed significantly twice throughout its lifetime. First time
  was around 1994 when the Toshiba TA7136AP opamp was replaced with the
  Rohm BA728N. In 2000 the opamp was again changed. This time it was
  replaced with the Mitsubishi M5223AL. Regardless of the circuit
  changes, the DS-1 sounds just like it did when first released back in
  1978. The DS-1 has also gone through a number of cosmetical changes.
  The earliest version had a clear switch, silver thumb screw and the D
  in DS-1 placed directly underneat the t in Distortion. The clear
  switch disappeared around serial number 8700, the silver thumb screw
  at serial number 0500 while the D in DS-1 ended up under the i in
  Distortion around serial number 13xx00.” Bossarea

MusicRadar • Gitarre&Bass: Boss DS-1 Distortion Mods • Gitarre&Bass:
Boss DS-1 Keeley Clipping Mode Mod • Gitarre&Bass: Boss DS-1 Keeley Mod
• Boss Is Best (JHS) • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • 1970’s
Op-Amp Distortion (JHS) • Boss DS-1 Distortion Analysis (ElectroSmash) •
Schematic (ToneHome)

The DS-1 has three controls: Tone, Level and Distortion. The popular way
to dial in the DS-1 is to set Distortion and Tone far below 12 o’clock
and turn up the level, and use it with an already distorted amplifier.

Fractal Audio has modeled the DS-1 and provides a virtually modded
version as well, based on Robert Keeley’s popular Seeing Eye
(LED-clipping) and Ultra mods.

  "I made the model by taking the DS-1 and applying the Keeley "Seeing
  Eye" and "Ultra" mods.” Fractal Audio

The model has been updated to Second Edition specs.

  "Some component values changed. Not a big difference." Fractal Audio

    BOSSChannel • Must Have Guitar Essentials (JHS)  • Nirvana Guitar Tones (Reverb) • Pete Thorn • ProGuitarShop • Stop Using It Wrong! • Ola Englund • Kurt Cobain 1991 Nevermind Gear Guide (PMT) • Is the Boss DS-1 The Best Distortion Pedal Ever? (PMT) • The Vape • gearmanndude • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • What Makes This Pedal Great (Wampler) • Rhett Shull: This Is WAY Better Than The Tubescreamer • DS-1 Mod Shootout: Keeley Ultra vs All Seeing Eye vs Stock • Boss DS1W WAZA (Pete Thorn

DS1 DISTORTION MOD (modded BOSS DS-1 Distortion)

See above.

ESOTERIC ACB (Xotic AC Booster)

[X AC.jpg]

Original forum thread

Xotic is an American company known for its quality effects, such as the
RC Booster, AC Booster, EP Booster, BB preamp and Robotalk, as well as
its guitars and basses. The AC Booster (“Almost Clean”) pedal is a
diode-based overdrive pedal. It produces a sweet overdrive with an
uncompressed tube feel. Its sound is thicker than the BB preamp pedal /
BB Pre model (see above). It lends itself very well to thicken an
already overdriven rhythm or lead tone. It can also operate as an
overdrive on its own. The AC Booster has been discontinued.

  “The Xotic AC Booster Overdrive Guitar Effects Pedal creates a warm
  and pleasant sound by using the finest quality parts available. The AC
  Booster is a natural sounding "overdrive" pedal. Not "heavy"
  distortion, but a sweet thick overdrive with an "open" non-compressed
  feel. It's capable of a 20dB+ boost with an adjustable ±15dB two band
  active EQ, which adds a wide range of harmonic content to your ideal
  sound. The super wide range gain control allows for enough gain for it
  to work as a distortion pedal when turned all the way up. Equipped
  with not only boost Gain but also Treble and Bass controls that allow
  you to adjust your sound anyway you like” Xotic

The pedal has Gain, Volume, Bass and Treble knobs. The tone controls are
active, cutting or boosting up to 15dB. It doesn’t hurt to turn up
Treble a little, to prevent muddiness.

The model is also available as an input boost type in the Amp block.

    ProGuitarShop: Strat • ProGuitarShop • J.D. Simo • Tim Pierce • Prymaxe • Living Room Gear Demos

ESOTERIC BASS RCB (Xotic Bass RC Booster)

[RC-Bass.jpg]

It's a version of the RC Booster (see below) designed for bass guitar.

ESOTERIC RCB (Xotic RC Booster v1)

[X RC.jpg]

Original forum thread

Xotic is an American company known for its quality effects, such as the
AC Booster, RC Booster, EP Booster, BB preamp and Robotalk, as well as
its guitars and basses. The RC Booster (“Really Clean”) diode-based
pedal is very popular as a clean boost. Known for its transparency, it
enhances the sound and harmonics of the guitar and amp, adding body. Its
EQ controls lets further sculpt the tone. Many users, including pros,
leave the pedal turned on all the time. It’s also used often to boost
the level when switching to single-coil pickups, using the tone controls
to finetune the sound. Scott Henderson has been the pedal’s main
endorser and has been honored with signature editions (review in
German), which led to the development of the RC Booster v2 ($170) with a
second gain channel. In 2022 a 20th Anniversary edition was released
with cosmetic changes only.

  “The best characteristic of this booster is to have no character at
  all.”

  “The RC Booster offers a super transparent 20db+ clean boost and a +-
  15db 2 band active EQ without ever compromising the integrity of the
  original TONE. It provides a solution to sound degradation, caused by
  long instrument cables and/or long effect chains between guitar and
  amp, by strengthening the original signal.” Xotic

  “I particularly LOVE the RC Boost for single coils - Strats and Teles
  or P-90s or lipstick tube pickups. I usually just leave an RC Boost or
  Fractal drive block "on" when using them. Not a lot of drive when
  using Fractal version, less than 2 sometimes to emulate the clean
  boost of an RC, and volume around 4.5 to 5.5. One of the secrets of
  the amazing Doyle Bramhall II is he usually puts an RC boost pedal
  next to last in his signal chain, right before the wah (which is
  last!), and shaves just a hair off the top and bottom end using the
  tone controls, and then has drive and level at about 11 to 11:30 as
  well...also works good. When used right, the RC Boost makes your Strat
  or Tele or Lipstick tube pickups sound like single coil pickups but
  louder, approaching humbucker signal level (P90s usually have some
  stronger output and may not need as much help).” AustinBuddy

The pedal has Gain, Volume, Bass and Treble knobs. The tone controls are
active, cutting or boosting up to 15dB.

The model is based on an original RC Booster (v1). You can argue about
the need in a digital environment for a Drive block that acts as a clean
boost, because there are less CPU-hungry solutions to neutrally boost
signal level. But the RCB model adds a little magic of its own if you
keep Gain low. The model is also available as an input boost type in the
Amp block. The model is featured in some factory presets, search this
wiki page for “RCB”.

    Michael Thompson • Xotic • ProGuitarShop • ProGuitarShop: RC Booster V2 • Scott Henderson Signature Model • Scott Henderson Interview • Ryan Kiesshausser • Prymaxe • Andrew Cheng • shnobel • Guitar Sanctuary featuring Andy Timmons • D’Addario Sound Advice • Mike Hermans

ETERNAL LOVE (Lovepedal Eternity)

[X Eternal.jpg]

Original forum thread

It seems that each day a new overdrive pedal is released to the masses,
either boutique or mass-produced. Often, it's just another variation on
the same old Tube Screamer circuit. Yet, some stand out and earn a
permanent position in this crowded market. Lovepedal’s Eternity is such
a pedal. Even being within the higher price segment, it has found its
way onto many pedalboards.

  "The Lovepedal Eternity delivers fantastic, tubey overdrive at every
  setting. You just can’t make this pedal sound bad. The extremely
  interactive controls offer you three knob options for sculpting
  overdrive sounds; Drive, Level (clean boost), and Glass which
  functions as a treble booster. Through variation of the Drive and
  Level knobs you can alter the mix of pedal distortion sound and your
  amp’s natural overdrive characteristics, giving you a myriad of tone
  options. Through manipulation of the Glass knob you can dial in some
  sweet Brian May style tones, or roll it off for some dark, warm
  goodness. The Love Pedal Eternity has developed a huge following and
  is currently played by Andy Summers of The Police and Richard Fortus
  of Guns N’ Roses, among others. The Lovepedal Eternity can be 3 pedals
  in one – Overdrive, Treble Booster and Clean booster – depending on
  where you set the dials. You can also blend these 3 factors. Darker
  tones brighter tones, etc. Unorthodox tone control. It’s a treble
  boost instead of a normal tone control. It is a very smooth type of
  OD. It can go from nothing at all to sounding like a very warm vintage
  overdriven tube amp or a clean flat booster or a treble booster even a
  tweed amp. With the treble boost all the way off, it is warmer than
  most tube amps. The Eternity Overdrive always stays true to what’s
  coming out of your guitar so you never turn into the pedal. No matter
  how hard you drive it. It also breaks up the harder you dig into the
  strings, which is priceless.” Lovepedal

Lovepedal has released various versions of the pedal over the years and
the differences aren’t always clear. It is unknown which version of the
Eternity has been modeled by Fractal Audio.

The Eternity pedal has three knobs: Level, Drive and Glass (model: Tone)
which sets the amount of presence. The Glass knob has a large range
which makes it very versatile. With Tone cranked, the model turns into a
treble booster. Richard Fortus (Guns N’ Roses) sets the knobs like this:
Level 3 o‘clock, Glass 9 o’clock, Drive 12 o’clock.

The diode-based model of the Eternity noticeably has less bass and low
mids than comparable pedals / models. It doesn't emphasize the mids in
the same way a Tube Screamer does. This makes it more transparent, less
grainy and an excellent choice to put before a clean Amp model for
“edge-of-breakup” rhythm strumming, while still having enough body for
single note runs. To add glassy presence to clean (and dirty) amp tones:
turn down Drive low (try 0.25), turn down Tone a bit, and run it into a
clean amp for a great edge-of-breakup sound, or into a dirty amp for
focused overdrive. For more gain, increase Drive and Level. The model is
featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page for “Eternal”.

    Eternity versions • ProGuitarShop • Jack Zucker • Sean Michael: Kanji Eternity • Sean Michael: Eternity John F. Klaver

FACE FUZZ (Dallas-Arbiter Fuzz Face)

[X Fuzzface.png]

Original forum thread

Dallas-Arbiter’s Fuzz Face (1966, UK) is based on the Maestro fuzz and
the Tone Bender MK1.5 fuzz with two transistors. With its smiley face
shape, it’s perhaps the most famous of all fuzz boxes because Jimi
Hendrix used it. Hendrix used germanium-based designs (pre 1969) at
first and switched to the silicon versions (post 1969). The silicon ones
produce higher and more aggressive gain. His Fuzz Face pedal sold for
over $40.000! Other famous users include David Gilmour, Stevie Ray
Vaughan, Pete Townsend, Eric Johnson (silicon version) and Gary Clark
Jr. The Fuzz Face was the first pedal to have a true bypass switch.
Dunlop now owns the rights to the Fuzz Face name and produces various
versions. Fulltone’s The ’70 Pedal is based on the silicon version. JHS
Pedals’ Smiley is one of many clones.

  "Arbiter Electronics Ltd. first issued the Fuzz Face in 1966. Later
  units bear the "Dallas Arbiter", "Dallas Music Industries Ltd.",
  "CBS/Arbiter Ltd." or "Dunlop Manufacturing Inc." name. The earliest
  units used germanium transistors. Silicon transistors were used in
  later editions of the pedal. Silicon transistors provided for a more
  stable operation, but have a different, harsher sound. The electronics
  are contained in a circular-shaped metal housing. Ivor Arbiter "got
  the idea for the round shape when he one day saw a microphone stand
  with a cast iron base". The pedal uses two knobs, one for volume, and
  one for the amount of "fuzz" the pedal produces. The arrangement of
  controls and logo on the box suggests a smiling face. The circuit is
  based on the shunt-series-feedback amplifier topology - a standard in
  engineering text books. Sola Sound and Vox had been using the same
  circuit topology for some of their Tone Bender pedals earlier in 1966.
  Dallas Music Industries made a final run of Fuzz Faces in 1976 or
  1977, shortly after they had moved to the United States. The company
  bought Crest Audio in the 1980s and although it was operating under
  that name when it reissued the Fuzz Face in the 1986, the units bore
  the Dallas-Arbiter name. They made about 2000 Fuzz Faces until 1990.
  In 1993 Dunlop Manufacturing took over production, making a variety of
  Fuzz Faces to this day. Several germanium and silicon models are
  available.” Wikipedia

The History of the Fuzz Face (Tone Report) • Gitarre & Bass: Jimi
Hendrix: Fuzz Face (German) • Gitarre & Bass: Arbiter Fuzz Face (German)
• Fuzz Face Analysis (ElectroSmash) • Legends – The History of the Great
Fuzz Pedals (Audiofanzine) • Premier Guitar's Face the Fuzz • Brief
History of Fuzz

The Fuzz Face is a simple pedal with just two knobs: Volume and Fuzz
(model: Drive).

A Fuzz Face tends to sound better with a Marshall than a Fender amp
etc., because Marshalls have less bass, and a Fuzz Face puts out loads
of bass. any players put this fuzz before a non-master amp (i.e.,
Plexi), because the power amp’s distortion will soften the hard, harsh
clipping of the fuzz. They crank the Fuzz and Volume knobs and use the
guitar’s volume knob to get the desired amount of fuzz. Glassy clean
sounds are also achievable, especially with the germanium-based version,
by turning down volume on the guitar. Other tricks: follow the Fuzz Face
with a Treble Booster to tame the lows or put the Octave Distortion
model before the fuzz. With Fuzz maxed out, the pedal sounds like a ring
modulator.

Fractal Audio’s Face Fuzz model is based on a germanium Fuzz Face. You
can easily switch to the silicon version by changing the Clip Type
parameter in the model. The model is featured in some factory presets,
search this wiki page for “Face Fuzz”.

    Tone Factor • Fuzz Face Shoot Out (James Santiago) • Fuzzface shootout (gearmanndude) • gearmanndude • ProGuitarShop • Hendrix Fuzz Face Tips and Tricks (James Santiago) • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • The First Guitar Effects Ever (JHS) • How To Find the Fuzz Pedal You Need (JHS) • JJ of the T • Vintage Vs Modern Fuzz Face Pedals (Wampler)

FAS BOOST (custom model)

[Logo.jpg]

Original forum thread

Fractal Audio provides a couple of custom models. These virtual drives
have no real-life equivalents. They solely exist within Fractal Audio’s
processors, implementing ideas and improvements on existing pedals. The
FAS Boost model does a fine job as such. Its gain is pleasing and
neutral without a mid-hump, it’s full-bodied and smooth, and a little
dark. In short time, it has become a favorite among many Fractal Audio
players. It works equally well with clean and dirty amp tones, not
needing a lot of gain (try Drive at 3, Tone at 7). It also works well as
a boost. The model is also available as an input boost type in the Amp
block. It is featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page for
“FAS Boost”. The model lends itself as a platform to emulate other
pedals. For example, forum members have used it to recreate a Maxon
overdrive. Fractal Audio’s design lets you experiment with different
diode types and quantities.

  "It's not based on anything. It's my take on an ideal boost pedal.”
  Fractal Audio

FAS LED-DRIVE (custom model)

[LED.png]

Original forum thread

Fractal Audio provides a couple of custom models. These virtual drives
have no real-life equivalents. They solely exist within Fractal Audio’s
processors, implementing ideas and improvements on existing pedals. The
LED-Drive model is such a custom model. It models LED (light-emitting
diode) clipping. Yes, those little lights can be used for intentional
signal clipping, creating distortion. LEDs have a lot of headroom and
are less fizzy and louder than other diodes. This can be demonstrated by
comparing the “LED” Clip Type to other types. Video: test different
clipping modes for diy pedals. LED clipping isn’t used that often in
pedals, although it seems to gain popularity. Examples: MI Audio’s
Crunch Box (modeled by Fractal Audio), Pro Co's Turbo Rat, Landgraff’s
L'DO, Keeley’s Psi Fuzz, modifications of the BOSS DS-1 (modeled by
Fractal Audio), Ibanez TS9DX Hot (modeled by Fractal Audio), Suhr Riot
(modeled by Fractal Audio), and guitar amplifiers such as Marshall’s
Jubilee. The LED-Drive model sounds most pleasing when used with a dirty
amp model, with Drive turned down and Tone a bit up.

FAT RAT (modded Pro Co RAT with LED clipping)

[FATRAT.png]

Based on a Pro Co RAT, changed to LED clipping. See RAT DISTORTION
below.

FET BOOST (custom model)

[Logo.jpg]

Original forum thread

FET is the abbreviation of Field-Effect-Transistor, a semi-conductor.
FETs are used in pedals and amplifiers. For example, Dumble amplifiers
have a FET input for low-gain instruments. In guitar-oriented products,
MOSFET and JFET types are common.

  “The field-effect transistor (FET) is a transistor that uses an
  electric field to control the shape and hence the electrical
  conductivity of a channel of one type of charge carrier in a
  semiconductor material. FETs are also known as unipolar transistors
  since they involve single-carrier-type operation. The FET has several
  forms, but all have high input impedance. While the conductivity of a
  non-FET is regulated by the input current (the emitter to base
  current) and so has a low input impedance, a FET's conductivity is
  regulated by a voltage applied to a terminal (the gate) which is
  insulated from the device. The applied gate voltage imposes an
  electric field into the device, which in turn attracts or repels
  charge carriers to or from the region between a source terminal and a
  drain terminal. The density of charge carriers in turn influences the
  conductivity between the source and drain. (...) The most commonly
  used FET is the MOSFET.” Wikipedia

  “FET’s can behave like Tubes in a properly designed circuit. They can
  “clip” (distort) in a pleasing way instead of being buzzy or spiky
  sounding (like a Transistor) and can also add a subtle Limiting to the
  signal which can even-out the volume making your Live and Recorded
  tones more pleasing to the ear." Fulltone

FET is available as a Clip Type in Fractal Audio’s modeling of drives,
demonstrated through the FET Boost model. Note that FET Boost and FET
Preamp are different Drive models. The FET Boost model is not based on a
real pedal, it’s a custom model. Fractal Audio’s custom models have no
real-life equivalents. They solely exist within Fractal Audio’s
processors, implementing ideas and improvements on existing pedals. The
FET Boost model has been in the firmware since the early days. It’s a
favorite model of many players, boosting the signal going into the amp.
Slamming the input of amps often results in better tone than using an
overdrive. The increased amp distortion is natural, and the tone gets
fatter, enhancing the characteristics of the amp instead of changing
them. So why do people love this model? Well, how do you describe sound,
why does person A like a certain tone, and person B doesn’t? The FET
Boost is rather neutral (the tone doesn’t change much at default
settings into a clean amp) but still adds “something” to the tone. To
operate as a boost, use default settings and adjust Drive or Level. The
FET Boost model is featured in some factory presets, search this wiki
page for “FET Boost”.

  "A gentle, smooth clipping booster with tone controls." Owners Manual

    Fulltone Fat Boost 3 (ProGuitarShop) • Fulltone Fat-Boost vs Fat-Boost II (Gearmanndude)

FET PREAMP (possibly based on the BOSS FA-1 FET Amplifier)

[X FA1.png]

Original forum thread

When this model was added to Fractal Audio’s firmware, it became known
that The Edge (U2) had started using Fractal Audio gear. The Edge is
known for using the BOSS FA-1. Perhaps there’s some correlation between
The Edge’s use of Fractal Audio gear and the addition of this model. But
it has never been disclosed or acknowledged that this model is based on
the FA-1. For this write-up, the model is assumed to be similar.
Reportedly, Rory Gallagher sometimes used the FA-1 as a replacement for
his Dallas Rangemaster treble booster. The rare BOSS FA-1 FET Amplifier,
from the short-lived Pocket Series, is a pocket-size amp, meant to be
attached to the player’s belt. It’s not a pedal and doesn’t even have an
On/Off switch. It was made between 1983 and 1984. FET is an abbreviation
of Field-Effect-Transistor, a semi-conductor. For more information, read
the FET Boost article. It’s hard to find an original FA-1 nowadays. If
you do find one, it will be expensive but there are lots of clones,
including DIY. JHS manufactures its own clone, the Clover.

The FA-1 is primarily used as a boost. Slamming the input of an amp
often results in better tone than using an overdrive pedal. The
increased amp distortion is natural and transparent, and the tone gets
fatter, enhancing the characteristics of the amp instead of changing
those. Alternative boosting solutions are discussed elsewhere on this
page.

BOSS FA-1 manual • Catalinbread • ToneHome Schematic

The FA-1 has these controls: Volume (model: Drive), Bass and Treble
(active tone controls) and a Flat / Low Cut switch. The switch is a 6dB
low cut at 200 Hz, designed to prevent feedback (“howling”) when used
with acoustic instruments. Similar behavior can be achieved in the model
with the Low Cut control.

The FET Preamp model, which may or may not be based on the FA-1, is not
entirely neutral or clean. It adds grit and warmth to the tone and
provides much more gain than the FET Boost model. Reportedly, the FET
Preamp with Drive at zero sounds like the pre-amp section of the Maestro
EP-3 Echoplex, sweetening and compressing the sound a little. As such,
it may be an alternative to EP-3 clones such as the Xotic EP Booster and
Catalinbread Epoch Pre.

The model also lends itself as a substitute for a basic clean guitar amp
(model). Select the FET Preamp, turn up Tone, Treble and Bass, keep
Level really low, add another drive before it (i.e. BB or Riot). It
won’t sound fantastic, and dynamics will be mostly absent. This allows
you to use the Fractal Audio FX8 as a preamp (perhaps connected to a
separate power amp and a cabinet). On the FX8, you can even use it in
combination with some EQ to simulate an amplifier as well as a cabinet,
without using an Amp block and Cab block at all, as demonstrated here.

The model is featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page for
“FET Preamp”.

    Boss fa1 Fet Amplifier rehoused by JHS • Retro Sonic Boost FA-1 (ProGuitarShop) • Boss FET Amplifier FA 1 • Why You NEED Boost Pedals (JHS) • Why You Need A Preamp (FA-1) (JHS) • Boss FA-1 FET Amp demo

FULL OD (Fulltone Full-Drive 2)

[X FD2.jpg]

Original forum thread

Mike Fuller of Fulltone was one of the first designers of boutique
pedals. He is the inventor of the 3PDT switch, allowing manufacturers to
build true bypass pedals with a LED. The Full-Drive overdrive pedal
(1993), and especially the ’96 Full-Drive 2 (FD2), marked the rise of
his fame. The diode-based pedal is based on the Tube Screamer circuit
but has evolved since then. Like the Tube Screamer, the Full-Drive can
be used as a standalone overdrive or to boost an already overdriven amp.
It has 3 modes: Vintage, Flat Mids and Comp-Cut. There are many versions
of the Full-Drive, including smaller enclosures. The ’96 orange
Full-Drive 2 is very collectable. The Full-Drive 2 V2, released in 2018
($200), features a second channel. The Full-Drive is used by John Mayer,
Robin Trower (picture) and many others.

Legendary Tones • 5 Killer Dual Channel Overdrives (Reverb) • Gitarre &
Bass: Fulltone Full-Drive 3 (German) • Gitarre & Bass: Fulltone
Full-Drive 1, 2, 3 (German)

The pedal has these controls: Volume, Tone, Overdrive, Boost (not
modeled). The Tone knob acts as a Presence control. Some versions of the
pedal offer additional controls, such as a Comp/Cut push-pull pot and a
second drive channel. Robin Trower sets the three controls on his pedal
around 3 o’clock, running into a clean-sounding Marshall.

Fractal Audio’s Full OD model is thick and dark. Set Drive low to smooth
out an already overdriven amp or turn it up with a clean amp. Turn up
Tone high to add presence to the sound, as with the real pedal. For an
aggressive heavy sound, run it with low Drive into a high gain amp. The
Full OD model is also available as an input boost type in the Amp block.
The model is featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page for
“Full OD”.

  "The Full OD model is based on a Fulltone Fulldrive 2." Fractal Audio

    Full Drive 2 • Fulldrive 3 vs Fulldrive 2 • Sound Like John Mayer By Busting The Bank (Andertons) • Robin Trower • FullDrive 2 vs Fractal FullOD  • Premier Guitar's Rig Rundown: Robin Trower • 10 Rare Pedals (JHS) • Full Drive V2 How-To • Regent Sounds • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • Bad Monkey vs Full-Drive (JHS)

GAUSS DRIVE (Mesa Flux-Drive)

[Flux-drive.jpg]

Mesa states: "The overdrive pedal for those who want more of all the
best things from an overdrive! It has more liquid gain and enhanced
sustain that easily feeds into rich harmonic overtones making it
incredibly addictive and inspiring to play, whether into a clean amp
channel or especially to enhance a crunch or higher gain channel! It
also offers a more complete tone-shaping network with individual Treble
and Bass controls. This architecture makes the FLUX-DRIVE a more
complete preamp with added versatility beyond that of most overdrive
pedals."

Controls: Level, Gain, Bass, Treble.

    Harry Maes • N Stuff Music

GRIDDLE CAKE (Crowther Hot Cake)

[HotCake.jpg]

Paul Crowther from New Zealand has been making the Hot Cake overdrive
pedal in various versions since 1976. Mark Knopfler and Neil Finn are
famous users. Depending on the version, the player can switch between
Normal / Bluesberry mode, and guitar / bass mode. The V2 version adds
external switches for extended low frequencies (XLF switch) and smoother
overdrive (Cream+ switch). The Kometcake was a version for Komet
amplifiers. Like the Klon and many overdrive pedals, the Hot Cake sounds
best as an overdrive when used with an amplifier that’s already breaking
up. It’s fat but doesn’t turn the sound into a compressed mess. It
matches especially well with mid-heavy VOX-type amplifiers.

The pedal has these controls: Level, Presence, Drive, and a XLF switch
which extends low frequencies (for bass and extended range guitars). The
XLF function can be replicated by turning the Bass Response knob in the
model fully clockwise.

With Drive and Presence set low, the pedal operates as a clean boost.
Turn up Drive and it’s an overdrive, without drifting away from the
amplifier’s core sound. Crank Drive, and it enters fuzz territory.

It doesn’t have a treble cut circuit. The Presence control bumps the
800Hz EQ band. With Presence turned counterclockwise, mids are flat,
making it a great fit with mid-heavy VOX-type amplifiers. Older Hot Cake
versions have a fixed switch instead of variable Presence.

    David Fisher • Brett Kingman: Double Hotcake • Leon Todd: I regretted selling this pedal • The SuperFunAwesomeHappyTime Pedal Show • Prymaxe • My new favorite overdrive pedal • Neil Finn • ToneFactor • Guitar Empire • Leon Todd: the new Axe-Fx III Hot Cake Model • John Cordy

GUARDIAN PHOTON SPEED (Greer Lightspeed)

[LIGHTSPEED.jpg]

The sound ranges from a clean transparent boost to mild gritty
overdrive.

"The Lightspeed Organic Overdrive is a very natural sounding overdrive.
Why "organic"? Well, simply put, it's the clearest, most natural
feeling, and best overdrive we've heard for the player looking for a
natural drive tone. Blending with the tone of the guitar and amplifier,
this pedal has rich harmonics and complex but smooth clipping. The
Lightspeed Overdrive is sensitive to pick attack and has a different
"feel" than other overdrives. The Lightspeed can be set to be
"transparent", but can also drive your signal to the edge." Greer Amps

The pedal has these controls: Loudness (Level), Drive, Freq. (EQ). The
circuit is similar to that of the Timmy overdrive.

Premier Guitar

    Greer Amps:Josh Murty • BlackandWhiteBlues • Rabea Massaad • Andertons • BlackandWhiteBlues • shnobel •Lance Kelner • Premier Guitar • Greer Amps:Lance Seymour • Nick Granville • Walt Grace Vintage

HARD FUZZ (custom model)

[Logo.jpg]

Original forum thread

This model is described in the Owners Manuals as a “hard-clipping,
60s-style fuzz”. It’s a custom model, not based on a real pedal. Fractal
Audio’s custom models have no real-life equivalents. They solely exist
within Fractal Audio’s processors, implementing ideas and improvements
on existing pedals. It’s certainly different from the other available
fuzz models. It uses the “Hard” clip type and is very buzzy. It seems to
work best with a clean Amp model. With Drive turned up high, the bass
gets out of control. As always with fuzzes, use the guitar’s volume knob
to control the amount of fuzz. The Hard Fuzz is featured in factory
presets such as factory presets like Stereo Death Fuzz, Post Amp Fuzz
and Shoegaze Fuzz.

HEARTPEDAL 11 (Lovepedal OD11 / Amp Eleven)

[X Amp11.jpg]

Original forum thread

Lovepedal’s OD11 (OD Eleven) and Amp Eleven pedals feature the same type
of overdrive, replicating the authentic sound of an overdriven tube amp.
They won’t do over-the-top distortion, but convincingly produce organic,
dynamic, and touch-sensitive overdrive, without too much tone coloring.
The OD11 isn’t produced anymore, it has been integrated in the Amp
Eleven pedal, with the addition of a boost section.

  “AMP ELEVEN, fat, organic tone of an overdriven tube amp – with
  separate controls for bass and tone. (...) Smooth, round, balanced,
  low-to-medium gain overdrive. Slight overdrive to mild distortion.
  Great dynamic response and open sound.” Lovepedal

The pedal, together with some others, has been the cause of some stir on
internet forums. This That Pedal Show episode demonstrates the
similarities between the Timmy, Jan Ray and Amp Eleven. In this episode,
it’s stated that the Amp Eleven is “one of the best sounds we’ve ever
had in the studio”. And indeed, the pedal’s natural overdrive is
awesome, which applies to the model as well. Simply one of the best
amp-in-a-box solutions available.

The number “11” in its name probably refers to Rob Reiner’s This Is
Spinal Tap mockumentary.

Tone Report • Music Radar

The diode-based pedal has these controls: Level, Drive, Bass (cuts bass,
model: Bass Cut/Bass Response), Tone (treble). Set Drive to zero and
Tone high in the model to boost a clean amp. Get more overdrive with
higher Drive settings and adjust Tone and Bass Cut. The Bass Cut on the
Basic page of the model is the same as the Bass Response control on the
Advanced page. Adjust the control for the guitar pickups and amplifier.

  "On some models the controls are reversed relative to the actual
  pedal.” Fractal Audio

    Sebastian Falvo • Josh Smith • ProGuitarShop: Amp Eleven • ProGuitarShop: OD11 • That Pedal Show: King Of Tone Alternatives • That Pedal Show: Dream Overdrives • Chris Buck • Rob Chapman • Harry Maes • Mike Hermans • Sam Vilo

HOODOO DRIVE (Voodoo Lab Overdrive)

[X Hoodoo.jpg]

Original forum thread

Voodoo Lab has been around since the middle ‘80s, designing and
manufacturing several classic effects and audio tools. These days the
company is probably best known for their power supplies, powering many
pedalboards around the world. This pedal, not be confused with Voodoo
Lab’s Sparkle Drive, was released in the ‘90s. It has been discontinued
for a long time now. It was based on the DOD OD Preamp 250 (also modeled
by Fractal Audio), adding a gain stage. And it does indeed sound like an
OD 250. The Overdrive is said to have inspired Fulltone to create the
OCD (also modeled by Fractal Audio).

The pedal has 2 knobs: Gain and Volume.

The pedal and the model sound a little on the dark side. Use it with a
dirty amp such a Plexi, increase Tone a bit.

    Voodoo Lab Overdrive vs Fulltone OCD (gearmanndude) • Why Voodoo Lab Pedals Are Amazing (JHS)

HORIZON PRECISION DRIVE (Horizon Devices Precision Drive)

[X Precision.png]

Original forum thread

Misha Mansoor, also known as Bulb, is a member of the band Periphery,
one of the top djent bands. He’s also a user of Fractal Audio gear. He
founded the company Horizon Devices which released the Precision Drive
pedal as their first product. Jim Dunlop/MXR builds the pedal for
Horizon Devices. The Precision Drive ($220) is a modern overdrive,
specifically aimed at sculpting metal tones. Basically, it’s very
similar to a Tube Screamer, finetuned to work together with already
overdriven metal amplifier (or modeler), adding punch, bite, and
tightening the low end. According to Horizon Devices, the pedal was
developed with modelers and profilers in mind, and this review even
states that the pedal works better with those digital devices than with
tube amps. Make sure to check out Horizon Devices’ commercials and
tutorials, they are quite funny.

  “Never worry about fighting your tone or your gear again with the
  Precision Drive, the first modern overdrive made by guitar players for
  guitar players. The Precision Drive can take any set-up, both tube and
  digital, and turn it into the perfect modern metal rig with its
  precise tonal carving controls.” Horizon Devices

The pedal has 5 knobs, described in detail in the Users Guide: Vol,
Bright, Drive and Attack which adjusts character and punch (mids) and
tightens lows in 6 fixed steps. Its noise gate has not been modeled.

About the pedal’s Attack control, which in the model is a duplicate of
the Bass Response control on the Adv page:

  “Towards the left is more of a lower mids punch, and to the right can
  get very defined and pick-y. Left is a little more oldschool and
  thick, right is very modern and clear. You can get tons of unique
  combinations combining the attack knob with the bright knob. Turning
  bright up as you turn attack to the left can help keep your sound
  balanced, and vice versa. Or totally double down with both to the left
  for doom-y tones, or both to the right for super bright and cutting
  tones.” Guide

Fractal Audio’s implementation of the Attack control may be even better
than the original because it’s not limited to 6 positions.

About the pedal’s Volume control:

  “6 on the Precision drive is roughly equal to 10 on a Tubescreamer. So
  starting the volume at noon is usually a good bet. Adjust to taste
  from there.” Guide

About the pedal’s Bright control:

  “We made sure this control could be very bright in order to help make
  dark or muddy amps cut. So be careful when using the pedal for mid/low
  gain tones, because it can be a bit harsh in the upper portion of its
  range. When doing this, don’t be afraid to turn this knob pretty far
  to the left. It will tame it right up!” Guide

About the pedal’s Drive control:

  “You’re going to want to start with this near zero at first, as with
  most pedals. A cool trick is to dial in a really dry and clear tone,
  then slowly turn the drive knob up to around 1-2 until you get the
  level of saturation and thickness you’d like. We put a lot of effort
  into this portion of the circuit to make it actually usable, so feel
  free to turn it up for mid-gain tones, or to add saturation and
  sustain to your solos.” Guide

The models are featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page
for “Horizon”.

    Ola Englund • Rabea Massaad • Guitar World • Horizon Devices • Tone on a Budget • Tutorial 1 • Tutorial 2 • Tutorial 3 • Sweetwater • Jason Richardson • Riffs, Bears and Gear • Pete Thorn

INTEGRAL PRE (TC Electronics Integrated Preamp)

[TC.jpg]

This device from the '90s helped Fredrik Thordendal from Meshuggah
shapes his heavy metal sound. It's a simple boost, without an on/off
switch. Running on high voltage, it boosts the signal with a load of dB.
The active Bass and Treble controls make it possible to cut frequencies
to make the sound very tight.

Some manufacturers created clones. Pepers' Pedals Dirty Tree is a
popular one. Fortin made Thordendal a signature version of this boost.
Fortin's Grind pedal equals the original at fixed settings.

"The Fortin Grind is a TC Electronics Pre with the tone controls in a
fixed position." Fractal Audio

    Leon Todd: Fractal model • shnobel: original device • Leon Todd: original device • Amps, Pedals & Pickups: Dirty Tree • Riffs, Beards & Gear: Dirty Tree • Fortin Grind vs Fortin 33

JAM RAY (Venuram Jan Ray)

[X Jam.jpg]

Original forum thread

Vemuram’s Jan Ray (Japan) is a coveted boost and overdrive, endorsed by
an impressive list of artists, including Michael Landau, Oz Noy, Scott
Henderson, Pete Thorn, Matt Schofield and others. This boutique pedal
costs close to $400. It’s been the topic of heated discussions on
internet forums. This That Pedal Show episode demonstrates the
similarities between the Timmy, Jan Ray and Amp Eleven (all have been
modeled by Fractal Audio). It shines when combined with models of Fender
amps. A signature version was made for Mateus Asato (limited edition).

It can operate as a clean boost. It can turn a clean amp into a mildly
overdriven one, and as such operates as an amp-in-a-box pedal. The pedal
provides natural distortion, as well as crispness on the top, along with
warmth and softness in the lows (quoted from MixDown’s review). It
offers harmonic content, sustain and transparency, so you’ll still hear
the characteristics of the guitar you’re playing.

  “The Jan Ray was designed to recreate the punchy clear tone of the
  Blackface Fender amps from the 60’s. So-called the “Fender Magic 6”
  sound. An easy to handle overdrive keeping the characteristics of the
  guitar, with great sustain without any unnatural compression.” Vemuram

“Magic 6” refers to setting Volume to 6, Treble to 6, Middle to 3 and
Bass to 2 (3 x 2 = 6) on a Fender amp such as the Super Reverb, as
explained in the Guide to the Fractal Audio Amp Models.  

  "The Jan Ray is a slightly modified Timmy which itself is a modified
  Tube Screamer (albeit heavily modified).” Fractal Audio

The diode-based pedal has these controls (not labeled on the pedal):
Volume, Bass (high-pass), Treble, Gain. Start with low Drive and the
other controls at default.

    Absolute Music • Haar Guitars • intheblues • Sam Vilo • Livingroom Gear Demos • That Pedal Show: Dream Overdrives • Guitar Bonedo • gearmanndude • Jan Ray vs MXR Timmy • Paul Davids

KLONE CHIRON (Klon Centaur / KTR)

[Klon.jpg] [KTR.png]

The illustrious Klon Centaur overdrive was made by Bill Finnegan between
1994 – 2008. People buy used Centaurs for ridiculous amounts of money.
It’s assumed that around 8.000 original Centaurs exist. Josh Scott of
JHS Pedals has one with serial no. 2, which he put up for sale for
$500,000. For those who can afford it (and secure it), a Klon is a
mainstay pedal on the pedalboard. John Mayer is just one of its famous
users.

There are Gold and Silver versions of the Centaur. While the builder has
repeatedly stated that they sound the same, many players think
otherwise.

The “gooped” Centaur circuit board (covered in black epoxy) didn’t stop
people from investigating. As soon as the schematics became available in
2009, many builders started manufacturing clones, some of which come
close.

After a break, Bill Finnegan introduced the Klon KTR in 2012. Easier to
manufacture, with the same sound as the Centaur. The announcement of the
KTR is still online. The printed text on the KTR reminds the player of
the Centaur’s history and reads: “Kindly remember: the ridiculous hype
that offends so many is not of my making”. Some of the letters are
colored slightly different to make out: “KLON”.

Like the Centaur, the KTR delivers the rich harmonics of a loud
overdriven amp, without adding color of its own (unlike the Tube
Screamer, for example). It’s designed to push an amp that’s already on
the edge. It’s also an excellent clean boost at low gain settings.

  "The Centaur is a true overdrive , and whatever it’s providing in the
  way of distortion should have some amp distortion to blend in with.
  For the really natural cranked-amp sounds the unit is capable of, your
  amp needs to be turned up some, enough to give you at least a measure
  of the good stuff on its own.” Klon Siberia

The Klon circuit has JFET-based opamps and specific Germanium diodes.
It’s unique because it runs multiple audio paths, with the Gain knob
controlling the mix between the distorted and clean paths. The diodes
don’t come into action until the Gain knob is turned up. That’s why
players who use it for overdrive, set Gain at 10:30 or higher.

In 2021 Bill Finnegan announced that he needed to change the circuit,
because he was running out of the specific Germanium diodes he uses. He
assured that the sound would be retained, as demonstrated here.

Wikipedia • Electrosmash • Klon vs. Klone • Builder's Profile • the Cult
of Klon (Reverb

The pedal has these controls: Gain, Treble, Output. With Output at noon,
it’s already louder than unity gain. That’s a good thing, because Bill
Finnegan advises to set Output higher than the bypassed signal. With
Gain at its lowest, and Output turned up above unity gain, the Klon
operates as a clean boost. Many players prefer to use it that way. Set
Gain at 10:30 or higher for its famous overdrive sound.

Treble is neutral at noon.

  “Don’t be afraid to use the Treble control. Unlike the tone controls
  on most pedals, this one is natural-sounding and usable throughout its
  entire range. The middle part of the range was deliberately broadened
  to allow extremely fine gradations in treble response, so such off-
  center settings as ten o’clock and two o’clock, for example, are not
  extreme and shouldn’t be shied away from. Trust your ear, and use the
  control.” Klon Siberia

Fractal Audio has not disclosed whether the “Klone Chiron” model is
based on the Centaur or the KTR.

  "While working on the Klon algorithm, I discovered a few things.”
  Fractal Audio

While the Klon and its virtual equivalent are “special”, you shouldn’t
overlook other available models of transparent overdrives. For example,
the Heartpedal 11 and the Timothy models also provide warm-sounding
natural overdrive. Before the Klone Chiron model was introduced by
Fractal Audio, people used the FET Boost model to get close to the sound
of a Klon.

    Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • Klon Comparison Demo with Bill Finnegan • Klon KTR Prototype & Development Board with Bill Finnegan • five watt world • Jack Fossett • Andrew Cheng • Gladesville Guitar Factory • Friday Fretworks • Musictoyznetwork • Curtis Kent • Karl Verkade • Camilo Velandia • Living Room Gear Demos • That Pedal Show • Klon Centaur vs Vintage Ibanez Tube Screamer • shnobel • The Ultimate Klon Pedal Blindfold Challenge (Andertons) • King of Tone vs Klon Centaur • $7K VS $30 Clone (JHS) •  Everything Klon Centaur (JHS) • Emerald City Guitars • Bad Monkey vs KLON (JHS) • JHS Pedal NOTAKLÖN DIY kit

M-ZONE DISTORTION (BOSS MT-2 Metal Zone)

[X MT.jpg]

Original forum thread

Does BOSS really need an introduction? This subsidiary of Roland has
released an enormous variety of pedals over the years and continues to
do so today. Loathed by some because of their non-boutique character,
highly praised by others because of build quality and tone. BOSS may be
mainstream, but they have created lots of classics, used by Prince, Gary
Moore and many more. The Metal Zone pedal from 1991 in particular is
responsible for divided opinions and heated discussions. It was the era
of Metallica’s Black Album. This pedal, the successor of the Boss HM-2,
enabled players to turn their clean amps into heavy metal monsters with
insane amounts of distortion and compression/sustain. So, it was popular
with bedroom guitarists. So much that it hardly matters what type of
guitar is being played: the pedal makes them sound the same. It’s one of
BOSS’ best-selling pedals ever and at the same time probably the most
hated. And it is still being sold by BOSS today ($150). In fact, in 2018
BOSS released the MT-2W ($150), a Waza Craft version. Many companies,
including Analog Man and Keeley, offer modding services. The diode-based
MT-2 has peaks at 100 Hz and 5 kHz and is widely scooped around 500 Hz.
The pedal can be used as a preamp by itself, going into the effects
return of a guitar amplifier to bypass the amp’s own preamp.

  “The MT-2 is the metal pedal that followed the HM-2. It was released a
  couple of years before the HM-3 and was an instant success. It is one
  of the best-selling Boss pedals of all time. The Metal Zone produces a
  distortion that is a bit smoother than the HM-2 and HM-3. In addition
  to the LEVEL and DIST controls it’s got a 3 band sweepable parametric
  equalizer that gives complete control over the MT-2’s tonal spectre.”
  Bossarea

25 years in the Metal Zone • Tone Start • Gitarre & Bass #1 • Gitarre &
Bass #2 • You’re Using It Wrong

The pedal has these controls: Level, 3-band EQ (Low, Mid, High),
active), Distortion: amount of distortion. The Mid control is where it
counts. Select the desired frequency and turn Mid up and down. Also,
fight the urge to turn up Distortion too much.

While the MT-2 is infamous for the sounds that bedroom metal guitar
players get from it (scooped, far too much gain), it can deliver
acceptable tones, as demonstrated in some of the videos below.

    BOSSchannel • Worst Distortion Pedal Ever? • That Pedal Show • Rabea Massaad • Simon Neil from Biffy Clyro • Reverb.com • GMR • HearGear • World Music Supply • blondegraemey • Mark Holcomb • Ola Englund • Will it blues? • Bass demo • Boss Is Best (JHS) • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • Shred Master vs Metal Zone • Is it really a pre-amp? (Wampler)

MASTER FUZZ (Gibson Maestro Fuzz-Tone FZ-1A)

[X Maestro.jpg]

Original forum thread

The ’62 Maestro Fuzz-Tone by Gibson was the first fuzz pedal, relying on
germanium transistors. The idea for the pedal was born when musicians
looked for a way to reproduce the sound of a broken console transformer.
It became famous after Keith Richards used one in ’65 on “Satisfaction”
instead of a horn section. The Fuzz-Tone led to the development of the
Tone Bender and other fuzzes. Pete Townsend’s Fuzz-Tone sold for an
astonishing $12.000 (for a few resistors and capacitators). Other users
include Eddie Hazel. Back then, the purpose of a fuzz box also included
emulating instruments like violin, trumpet, cello, and organ. Some
compare the sound of the riff in “(Can’t Get No) Satisfaction” to that
of a trombone. Listen to this original demonstration record. Maestro is
owned by Gibson. Here’s a company timeline. In 2022, Maestro was
relaunched, presenting the Fuzz-Tone FZ-M as part of the “Original
Collection” line of effects.

  “The Maestro FZ-1 Fuzz-Tone was the first fuzz distortion device to
  become widely available on the market for electric guitars and basses,
  although there had been other prototype devices made. It was designed
  and manufactured by Gibson. The Maestro FZ-1 (along with its almost
  identical update the FZ-1a) achieved a peak of popularity in the
  1960s. The device was used by Keith Richards in the Rolling Stones'
  1965 hit "Satisfaction" and became a favorite of many garage rock and
  psychedelic acts of the time. Gibson re-issued the FZ-1a in the 1990s,
  but later discontinued the model. The Maestro FZ-1 sported a
  three-germanium transistor circuit with RCA 2N270 devices, powered by
  two 1.5-volt batteries, and a lead cable to connect it to an
  instrument (bass as it was originally intended, or guitar). Germanium
  devices are temperature sensitive, and the effect responds to the
  incoming signal's amplitude (volume) consistently. Upon release,
  Gibson/Maestro made a demonstration disc available, featuring sound
  samples of the different settings of the pedal and guitar combination,
  emphasizing the "brass-like" quality of certain tones. The circuit
  made its way into the body of Gibson's EB-0F "fuzz basses" (circa
  1964). Before the Rolling Stones' hit, Fuzz Tone's sales were abysmal.
  In late 1965, when the original units sold out, the circuit was
  revised, using 2N2614 or 2N2613 transistors, with pertinent biasing
  network, powered by a single, 1.5-volt battery. The model was
  re-designated as the FZ-1a, keeping the same wedge shaped enclosure as
  the FZ-1. In 1968, an updated model with a different look and sound
  was introduced, with a circuit designed by Robert Moog using a 9-volt
  power supply and alternatively 2 or 4 silicon transistors, and
  labelled the Maestro FZ-1B. It went through 3 circuit revisions. In
  the 1970s Maestro came out with the FZ-1S Super-Fuzz, which had a
  distinctly different look and sound than previous models.” Wikipedia

Brief History of Fuzz (Ultimate Guitar) • When Did Guitarists First Use
Fuzz, Wah, And Other Transistor-based Effects? (Reverb)

The Maestro is a simple pedal with just two knobs at the side: Volume
and Attack (amount of fuzz, model: Drive).

    (I Can't Get No) Satisfaction by The Rolling Stones • The 2000 Pound Bee by The Ventures • Maestro Fuzz-Tone FZ-1 1962 Demonstration Record • Drowninginguitars • Gibson Audio Sample • Gibson Maestro Fuzz Tone Demo FZ-1 A • Fuzz Tone demo • Fuzz Tone 2 demo • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • The First Guitar Effects Ever (JHS) • The First Pedal Demo Ever (JHS) • Gibson TV • Pedal of the Day

MAXOFF 808 (Maxon OD-808)

[X OD808.jpg]

Maxon in Japan built the original Tube Screamers for Ibanez. They’ve
also released these under their own brand name. The OD808 ($200) is a
twin brother to the Ibanez Tube Screamer TS808, dating back to 1979. It
sounds almost identical using the same op-amp type and almost the same
electronics, with all the bluesy characteristics for better and for
worse. The Maxon sounds slightly smoother and creamier, with less mids.
This, plus compression and bass roll-off, makes it a popular boost pedal
among hard rockers. For more information, read the sections about the
Tube Screamers.

“Can a pedal be considered a clone if it’s made by the company that made
the original?!? Maxon designed the original OD808 overdrive circuit in
the late 1970’s – they then rebranded this pedal for Ibanez as the TS808
Tubescreamer, and the rest is history... The OD808 Reissue offers up all
the warm, creamy, organic overdrive as the original and then some. Never
one to rest on their laurels, Maxon has tweaked the current version ever
so slightly to reduce noise level while retaining the legendary “808”
tone (see Tech Talk below). The OD808 is the perfect pedal for adding
smooth, tube-like overdrive to any clean amp – use it as a secondary
dirt channel to beef up a song’s chorus section, or keep it on all the
time for the crunchy tone that has defined rock and roll. The OD808 is
also ideal for pushing an already overdriven amp over the edge, a ‘la
Stevie Ray Vaughan. Hell, stack two of them together like Stevie did and
the house is a rockin’! You’ve never heard – or felt – bluesy goodness
like this before… In recent years the OD808 has been adopted as the
overdrive of choice by a generation of guitarists in a most unlikely
musical genre – metal. Turns out that the OD808’s mild compression and
slight low-end cut are perfect for tightening up high-gain amps;
allowing fast note runs to stand out with clarity while making rhythms
tight and punchy. Just listen to any recording by Grammy-award winning
Producer/Killswitch Engage founder Adam Dutkiewicz to hear how the OD808
has become the voice of a whole new generation of metal guitarists.
Besides the fact that the Maxon OD808 Reissue sounds richer, warmer, and
BETTER than the Ibanez TS808 Reissue, there are also these facts to
consider. Maxon developed the OD808 circuit more than 40 years ago, and
since then it’s become the most used, most imitated and most lauded
overdrive circuit of all time. While the 808-style overdrive circuit is
commonplace nowadays, in 1979 it was a unique design and an industry
first. The secret behind the legendary “808 tone” lies in the amplifier
section of the circuit. Rather than having separate amplifier and
clipping stages, the OD808 features a signal-distorting diode (Panasonic
#MA150) located in the negative feedback loop of the amplifier stage.
The OD808 distorts signal in the amplifier circuit itself which yields a
smoother, milder, more natural sounding distortion than a separate
clipping stage. This is also the reason that the IC type used in the
circuit has such a large impact on the unit’s tone. The Reissue uses the
correct JRC4558 Op Amp that made the 808 the tone of legend. It should
be noted that the Reissue Series OD808 uses different output resistors
than the original version. Vintage TS808’s are susceptible to
microphonic noise due to static electricity buildup on the chassis. To
improve performance, the positions of the output resistors on the
reissue OD808 were reversed and their values increased in order to
reduce noise levels. This circuit change has no audible affect on the
sound of the unit, save for reducing the noise levels.” Maxonfx

User’s Guide with sample settings • OD808 & OD-9 vs TS-9 • Legendary
Tones • Reviews on Maxonfx.com • Tube Screamer-style Pedals Compared

  (compared to the Tube Screamer) "Maxon sounds a bit different due to
  the different op-amp and diodes. Smoother and less midrange honk."
  Fractal Audio

    ProGuitarShop • PMTVUK • Intheblues • EytschPi42 • gearmanndude: Maxon 40th Anniversary OD808 versus Stock • gearmanndude • Do all tubescreamers sound the same? (Wampler)

MCMLXXXI DRV (1981 Inventions DRV)

[X 1981.png]

The great-looking DRV distortion is one of the latest pedals on the
boutique overdrive market, with a corresponding price ($250). It started
off as a clone of the famous Pro Co RAT, but brings some good stuff of
its own, making it more versatile than a RAT. The DRV works great with a
VOX-type amp. It puts juicy sounds, and sounds far better with a clean
amp than the RAT does.

Review by Guitar.com

  “A highly nuanced preamp/distortion pedal designed in collaboration
  with Jon Ashley of Bondi Effects. Through four years of abandoned
  prototypes and circuit tweaking, I think that we have emerged with
  something really special here. I wanted the DRV to be an extension of
  myself and what I personally needed from a distortion pedal. It is
  vintage minded in sound and concept. I find that there is a wide
  variety of sounds that can be found from tweaking three highly
  interactive knobs, which is how I like to tweak when I am finding a
  sound. Clear and harmonic-rich warmth with guitar specific midrange,
  which brings a lot of clarity to almost any instrument. I think I’m
  most proud of the lower gain sections of the pedal, where preamp meets
  distortion. The DRV has a unique dynamic range and sensitivity, where
  instead of going clean to slightly overdriven, it goes from clean to
  slightly distorted. I also love the thick and yet clear fuzz sounds
  that you’ll find in the high gain settings.” 1981 Inventions

The DRV has three controls: Drv, Cut (treble roll-off) and Vol. The
controls interact with each other. When adjusting Drive, adjust Cut too.
Don’t hesitate to turn Cut close to fully clockwise (cutting treble).

Try Drive between 2.50 and 5, Cut at 7.5 and Level at 8.

  "Doesn't look like it has much different gain. Pre-distortion shaping
  is different.” Fractal Audio

    Living Room Gear Demos • Pedal of the Day • 1981 Inventions DRV: The King of Dirt Pedals • 1981 Inventions DRV vs 1985 ProCo RAT (shnobel) • Distortion LTD • 5 High-Gain Pedals You Probably Haven’t Heard Before (Reverb) • Eric Merrow • Buddy Blues • IkeGuitar • Mark Johnston

MICRO BOOST (MXR Micro Amp)

[X Micro.png]

Original forum thread

MXR, now owned by Jim Dunlop, was one of the largest effects
manufacturers in the ‘70s and ‘80s. Several of their products are now
considered to be classics: Dynacomp, Phase 90 and 100, Flanger. The
Micro Boost model is based on MXR’s Micro Amp ($80), an op-amp driven
clean boost pedal. It is a redesign of the MXR Distortion + pedal (also
modeled by Fractal Audio) without the distortion, reportedly. It was one
of the first of its kind. It doesn’t provide distortion of its own (no
clipping). It just increases the signal level, causing the amp to
generate more gain, and therefore acting as a gain stage. While many
boost pedals claiming to be transparent, still add color to the sound,
the Micro Amp really is very neutral. Pete Cornish’s SS2 reportedly is
very similar to the Micro Amp.

ElectroSmash • Manual and schematic

  “Adding a preset amount of gain with just a single control, the Micro
  Amp is a great way to boost your signal for lead work or adjust
  between two different guitars with unmatched output (i.e. humbuckers
  to single-coils). It can also provide a permanent boost in a long
  effects chain where signal drop off is a problem.” MXR

Keith Barr (president and co-founder of MXR), when asked about the Micro
Amp (source: Analog Man's Guide to Vintage Effects): "That was one of
the later boxes that we didn't really care about”.

There’s only a single Gain control (model: Drive) that adds up to 26dB.

You can argue about the need for a Drive block that acts as a clean
boost in a digital environment, because there are less CPU-hungry
solutions. As a matter of fact, there isn’t much difference between the
Micro Boost at default settings and a “null” Filter block with matched
output level and High Cut. But if you are going to create a digital
replica of your rig from the ‘80s, include the Micro Boost.

    ProGuitarShop • Vintage MXR Micro Amp vs Newer MXR Micro Amp (shnobel) • 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS Pedals) • When John Frusciante Uses The Micro Amp

MID BOOST (custom model)

[Logo.jpg]

Original forum thread

The guitar is an instrument that lives in the middle frequencies area.
It has no business competing with bass (low frequencies), cymbals (high
frequencies), etc. The mids are where guitars shine. Emphasizing those
frequencies makes a guitar cut through the mix, which works far better
than increasing volume. That’s why some amps, pedals and guitars are
equipped with mid-boosting options.

Premier Guitar's The ABCs of EQ • EQ in the Fractal Audio wiki

This Mid Boost is a custom model by Fractal Audio. These models have no
specific real-life equivalents. They solely exist within Fractal Audio’s
processors, implementing ideas and improvements on existing pedals. The
Mid Boost model, based on a virtual silicon transistor, does just that:
it boosts the mids through an already overdriven amp. It makes leads and
solos stand out. It sounds like a cocked (fixed position) Wah pedal. A
similar effect can be achieved through a GEQ block, but this model also
adds distortion if desired. A little tweaking gets you a lead tone like
Brian May’s. Note that the model sucks a considerable amount of bass
from the signal. The frequency on which the model operates, is not
adjustable. The Drive parameter determines the amount of overdrive. The
model is also available as an input boost type in the Amp block.

    Fender Eric Clapton Stratocaster Mid Boost • One Control Purple Humper mid boost • VFE Pedals Focus Mid Boost • Demeter Fat Control Midboost

MOSFET DISTORTION (Ibanez MT10 Mostortion)

[Mt10.jpg]

The other 'green' overdrive, part of the '90s Ibanez 10 Series which
also included John Mayer's favorite Tube Screamer version. It's
different from the Tube Screamer though.

Visually not the prettiest pedal, but it's a coveted item in the
Nashville scene (like the Nobels ODR), so originals come at a hefty
price.

While MOSFET-based, the gain comes from clipping diodes. The 3-band tone
stack is post-gain.

The Karma MTN-10 and Wampler's Mofetta are clones.

    Everything Guitar • Ronquillo • Your Guitar • Pete Thorn • Wampler Mosfetta]

NO-AMP BASS DI (Tech 21 NYC Sansamp Bass Driver DI)

For bass players.

According to Tech 21 NYC: "Much more than just a direct box, the SansAmp
Bass Driver DI is capable of dialing up big vintage tube tones, bright
modern slap sounds, gnarly distortions, and all in between. Three
different outputs to drive power amps, recording desks, PA mixers, or
simply enhance your current rig. Controls include Presence for
definition and upper harmonic content; Blend to combine the proportion
of direct signal and SansAmp circuitry; and active EQ specifically tuned
for bass with 12dB of cut or boost

The controls offer a broad range of traditional bass amp sounds,
including such meaty styles as Bassman® and SVT®, as well as raunchy,
crunchy overdriven sounds that would typically require a multitude of
effects units. PRESENCE controls the amount of definition and upper
harmonic content.

- DRIVE adjusts the overall gain structure and overdrive.
- LEVEL regulates the XLR and affected 1/4″ output levels.
- BLEND allows you to mix the direct bass signal with SansAmp Tube
  Amplifier Emulation circuitry (which is particularly useful for basses
  equipped with piezo pickups).
- BASS & TREBLE are active EQ controls, specifically tuned for bass
  guitar, that cut or boost +/- 12dB."

Owners manual

NO-AMP BASS PRE (Tech 21 Sansamp SansAmp BassDriver DI)

Same as above, with the speaker emulation bypassed. This can be used
into a Cabinet block or as a boost into an Amp block.

More info to be added.

NOBELLIUM OVD-1 (Nobels ODR-1 BC Natural Overdrive)

[Nobels.jpg]

A cheap but beloved workhorse overdrive, especially in the Nashville
session player scene. Made in Germany. Famous users include Carl
Verheyen, John Shanks and Tim Pierce. It's green but it isn't a Tube
Screamer. Nobels also produces mini and anniversary editions of the
pedal.

The name says it all: natural overdrive. It adds gain while leaving the
guitar's own sound largely untouched. Many players think that's a good
thing. However, some think of transparency as blandness. The pedal
reacts very well to the guitar's volume setting. It's often used to
fatten ups single coils. The designer started his own company Nordland
and produces the Nordland ODR-C, a further refined version. Vemuram's
ODS-1, Wampler's Belle ands the Way Huge STO are based on the ODR-1.

The ODR has clipping diodes in the opamp. Controls are Drive, Spectrum
(adjusts bass as well as treble, but not mids), Level, Bass Cut.

The Bass Cut ("BC") switch on the current edition is meant to be used
with humbuckers. It's modeled via the Bass Response control. Set the
Bass Response to 1.0 to duplicate the response of the pedal with the
Bass Cut switch engaged. Set Bass Response to 5.0 to duplicate response
with BC switch disengaged.

More ODR-1 history

    The History and Sounds of the Best Kept Overdrive Secret in the Pedal Industry (Pedal Zone) • Could this be the ultimate overdrive pedal? • Why Do The Pros LOVE The Original 90's Nobels? • Sweetwater • That Pedal Show • Reverb • ProGuitarShop • Brett Kingman • Mike Hermans

OCTAVE DISTORTION (Tycobrahe Octavia)

[X Octavia.jpg]

Original forum thread

The story is that Roger Mayer, technician for Jimi Hendrix, designed a
fuzz pedal for him which added a ringing upper octave, using frequency
doubling (“Octavio”). Hendrix played it on songs like “Purple Haze” and
“Who Knows”. When a prototype broke down while on the road, Hendrix took
it to Tycobrahe Sound Company for repairs. After Jimi passed away,
Tycobrahe started selling the design as the Tycobrahe Octavia without
the consent of Roger Mayer. Different versions of the story exist.
Tycobrahe also built the PedalFlanger and ParaPedal pedals. All these
devices are extremely rare, sought-after, and very expensive. Tycobrahe
went out of business and the trademark now belongs to Chicago Iron, who
produce the $350 Octavian and other Tycobrahe designs.

  "The Octavia was an effects pedal designed for Jimi Hendrix by his
  sound technician, Roger Mayer. It reproduces the input signal from a
  guitar one octave higher and/or lower in pitch, and mixes it with the
  original and added distortion fuzz. It reproduces the input signal
  from a guitar one octave higher and/or lower in pitch, and mixes it
  with the original and added distortion fuzz. The effect was used by
  Jimi Hendrix and can be heard in guitar solos on the song "Purple
  Haze". Hendrix preferred to call the device the “Octavio”, and it is
  often referred to as such. After Hendrix's death in 1970 one of the
  original Octavias became the basis for the redesigned "Octavia",
  manufactured by Tycobrahe Sound Company in Hermosa Beach, California,
  during the mid-1970s. A limited number of the devices were produced,
  and today a used one in good condition sells for over $1,000 on eBay.
  Stevie Ray Vaughan owned nine of these devices." Wikipedia

Tycobrahe history

  “Our pedal, by itself, should give you a strong "fuzz face" like sound
  on the lower neck positions, and have a hint of octave doubling as you
  go up the neck, combined with a ring modulated sound. After the 12th
  fret especially on the G B and E strings, the octave becomes even more
  pronounced. You may already know about the need to use the neck
  pickup, with the guitar tone knob rolled all the way off to start. The
  pedal will sing and bloom octaves on the higher registers when
  followed by a high output distortion pedal, (not all buffered output
  pedals will do) or an amp drive channel that is setup for distortion
  that has a good deal of sustain, like a Marshall super lead gets when
  turned all the way up. Then using the neck pickup and tone knob rolled
  off, switch on the Octavian. Set the Octavian pedal volume knob to
  achieve unity gain with your amp's clean channel and the pedal boost
  knob all the way counter clockwise, or off. Depending on the pickups,
  anywhere from the 10th fret and up you should be able to play a note
  and the pedal will allow the fundamental note to sound and then bloom
  into the octave note. By adjusting the pedal boost and the volume knob
  of the guitar you can go from blooming octave to double note (chiming)
  octave to flute like octave only. It is a system, guitar Octavian,
  distorted pedal or amp, guitar output signal level and tone control
  that make this happen. It is the same with all the octave up pedals.
  Forgive me if you already know how to make the octave pedals sing on
  your setup, as there is only a certain way that it goes. At this time
  you should be able to produce a light quieter octave and ring
  modulator sound when using only the Octavian in the signal going to
  your clean amp channel. Many references to this tone are on any Band
  of Gypsies album. By switching on to your amp's gain channel, or
  switching on a fuzz/distortion pedal after the Octavian will produce a
  singing sustain that blooms into a clear ringing octave. Octave is not
  all it can do in this position. Chords in the lower positions are huge
  and fat. Not just for playing the Hendrix and Stevie Ray Vaughan set.
  This pedal blows many other distortion pedals off the stage when it
  comes to bottom end drive. When you get your Octavian pedal fitted
  properly in your setup, the fun really begins. When used either way
  the Octavian pedal is very touch sensitive. It responds to your
  playing style. Pick light and the octave comes out earlier. Pick heavy
  and the fundamental note sustains longer. Same with the guitar volume
  knob, turn down the volume for more octave. By experimenting with the
  guitar's tone knob, you can produce many different sounds and octave
  "sweet spots".” Chicago Iron

Roger Mayer has produced his own version of the pedal since the ‘80s:

  “The OCTAVIA is probably our most famous and distinctive creation.
  This guitar effect was designed in early 1967 and featured on "Purple
  Haze" and "Fire" by Jimi. Its unique tones can also be heard on such
  tracks as "One Rainy Wish", "Little Miss Lover", "Little Wing",
  "Machine Gun" etc. The OCTAVIA produces a sound that is an octave
  higher than the note you are presently playing. This doubling effect
  is accomplished through electronic mirror imaging techniques that are
  program sensitive and also respond to the feedforward inputs of the
  player. The electronic circuitry is analogue in design and will react
  faithfully to all the subtleties and harmonic overtones from the
  guitar. The effect produced is very unique but human in quality. The
  unit that is manufactured today is representative of the latest
  evolution of Octavia that Jimi used and contains the feedforward and
  gating effect that my earlier evolutions lacked. The modern clones
  today often copy the Tycobrahe unit that in fact was a rip off of my
  earlier 24 volt versions. These units were not designed to work
  optimally with 9 volts and in fact you would be buying a clone of a
  copy so it makes sense to buy a unit from the man who invented it.
  Electronically the OCTAVIA is an analogue circuit with the properties
  of a frequency doubler, envelope generator and amplitude modulator
  with addition frequency shaping filter circuits. The effect produced
  is subtle to wild depending on the settings used and will respond to
  the attack of the player. A clean tone from the guitar with say the
  tone rolled control rolled off will produce "ring modulated" overtones
  that characterise the solo to "Who knows". The sound is tangibly
  different if a fuzz unit is in front of the Octavia: an upper octave
  double is created, clearly demonstrated in the solo to "Purple Haze".
  The bright harmonics are more controllable if the neck pickup is
  selected and the tone control set to roll off the treble. The effect
  really comes into its own on the top E and B strings from the 7th fret
  up. A clean and precise picking style is essential with particular
  attention to accurate fretting techniques. Jimi placed the Octavia
  after a fuzz and wah unit in most cases so it would react to the
  combined effects of both the wah and one or more fuzz boxes. It is
  important to experiment with how much signal you are driving the
  Octavia with as this has a great influence on the sound produced.”

Fulltone is another company claiming to have designed an exact copy of
the original Tycobrahe Octavia (a copy of a copy). His Octafuzz (around
$150) is used by Joe Satriani. And there’s the Proctavia from Voodoo
Labs.

Fuzz Central • The History of the Great Fuzz Pedals • Roger Mayer’s
Octavia

The pedal adds an octave on top of the played note plus fuzz. The
recommended way is to use the neck pickup, roll off tone on the guitar
for best tracking and removing the fundamental note, and play single
close to the 12th fret. A low-gain Octavia into a clean amp sounds like
a Ring Modulator effect. It's mostly used in combination with a separate
fuzz, either before or after, or into a slightly dirty amp. The models
are featured in some factory presets, search this wiki page for
“Octavia”.

The Univox Super-Fuzz (also modeled) is another octavia-type of fuzz.

The pedal has two controls: Volume and Boost (amount of fuzz, model:
Drive)).

    Jimi Hendrix: Who Knows • Tycobrahe Octavia • Classic Fuzz Tones: Where To Begin? (That Pedal Show) • 1975 Tycobrahe Octavia • Octavio 60 Second Demo • Fulltone Octafuzz II OF-2

OD 250 (DOD Overdrive Preamp 250: reissue)

[OD250.jpg]

Original forum thread

DOD Electronics (David Oreste Di Francesco) was a famous American
manufacturer of pedals and other effect devices, a competitor of MXR at
the time. DigiTech started as a division of DOD. These days the DOD
brand is carried by DigiTech. In advertisements DOD referred to itself
as “America’s Pedal”.

The silicon diode-based DOD 250 Overdrive Preamp pedal was released
around the late ‘70s. In fact, it’s one of the first overdrive pedals.
Its circuit originally was based on the MXR Distortion + (also modeled
by Fractal Audio), but it's a little less fuzzy / raspy. It builds on
the LM741 op-amp. It says “preamp” on the pedal, but it’s not a preamp
as in an amplifier. The pedal keeps the middle frequencies flat, rolls
off bass, boosts highs and adds some compression when turning up gain.
This works very well with an amplifier on the verge of breakup or
already overdriven. The ’78 “gray spec” OD 250 is the most sought-after
version. DOD changed to a yellow enclosure in 1980. Later versions were
named FX50. A reissue was released in 2013 (here's a review).

JHS Pedals' Overdrive Preamp is a replica of the very first ’74 version
(before the “gray spec”, without “250” in the name). EarthQuaker’s Gray
Channel is a clone of the original OD 250. Voodoo Lab’s Overdrive (also
modeled by Fractal Audio) was based on the 250. DOD made a signature
version for Yngwie Malmsteen, the DOD YJM308, named after a Ferrari 308
(read more about it on AnalogMan.com). Fender’s Yngwie Malmsteen
Overdrive pedal is also based on the DOD 250. More about 3rd party
clones of the DOD 250 on Reverb.com. And much more background
information in this JHS Pedals video.

  “The legendary analog DOD Overdrive Preamp 250 is back, with over 40
  years of history and experience behind it. The new 2013 version of the
  legendary DOD 250 captures all of the classic tone and wild heart of
  the original but in no way tames its performance. The 250 is better
  than ever before with true bypass, a crisp blue LED indicator, gobs of
  output, and modern 9V DC power supply input. Redesigned with a lighter
  aluminum chassis, sleek yellow metallic flake and flat black matte
  bottom paint job, the undefined DOD Overdrive Preamp 250 pedal is the
  perfect sonic foundation to carry on the legacy of DOD. The DOD
  Overdrive Preamp 250 (2013) has Gain and Level controls, like its
  predecessors. Gain controls the amount of distortion, from just a
  touch of grit to all-out grind. Level dials in some subtle body for
  “always on” performance or huge amounts of boost for boosting solos
  above a dense stage mix. With the Gain all the way down, crank up the
  Level to boost your sound and cut through during your solos. True
  bypass allows your guitar tone to remain pristine even when the new
  DOD 250 (2013) is off. This is a big difference from the original
  which would color your bypassed tone. The modern 9V DC power supply
  input make the pedal more pedalboard friendly.” Digitech

The pedal’s controls are Gain (model: Drive) and Level. Turn them both
up and run it into a dirty Marshall.

Fractal Audio has modeled the “gray spec” version as well as the reissue
which has more gain.

    The Legend of the DOD 250 (JHS) • Reverb.com • Brett Kingman • 60 Cycle Hum • DigiTech • YJM308 Yngwie Malmsteen vs 250 Overdrive Preamp • ProGuitarShop • Audiofanzine • Overdrives Under $100 (JHS) • Why You Need A Preamp (JHS) • 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS) • SD-1 vs TS808 vs DOD 250 • Are you making this mistake with OD250 or Distortion+? (Wampler)

OD 250 GRAY (DOD Overdrive Preamp 250: original)

[X OD250.jpg]

See above.

OD-ONE OVERDRIVE (BOSS OD-1 Over Drive)

[OD-1.jpg]

The legendary '77 yellow Over Drive OD-1 was BOSS' first compact pedal
and possibly the first overdrive pedal on the market, following the fuzz
wave and preceding the Tube Screamer. It featured innovations such as a
battery compartment, a LED and electronical switching. The OD-1 features
asymmetrical clipping (unlike the Tube Screamer) using a quad op amp. It
was the first to mix the clipped signal with the original signal,
maintaining dynamics. The OD-1's gain is light and pleasant and cuts all
bass. The OD-1 was discontinued in 1985 and followed by the BOSS SD-1,
meant to compete with the Ibanez Tube Screamer. The OD-1 has been
reissued once, as part of BOSS' 40th Anniversary Box Set (limited
edition). The "Turbo" OD-2 (mid '80s - 1994) expanded the range of the
pedal to distortion. BOSS went back to basics with the OD-3 (1997 -
now), although it sounds different from the original (less mid-heavy).
The BOSS digital OD-1X is a totally different pedal, not a reissue.

The OD-1 has Level and Over Drive knobs, no Tone. It doesn't provide
much gain. It's a staple piece for blues players.

Electric Druide • AnalogMan

    Analog Man's OD-1 Vintage Chip Mod • OD-1 vs. SD-1 • OD-1 & SD-1 vs Ibanez TS808 & TS9 • Vintage Boss OD-1 Overdrive • Different Boss OD and SD Sounds • OD-1 vs SD-1 • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • OD-2 (Leon Todd) • TheToneShack • BOSS Is Best (JHS) • Boss Overdrive Pedals Explained (Wampler) • OD-1 vs SD-1 vs OD-1X

PARADIGM SHIFTER (Barber Electronics Gain Changer)

[Barber.png]

A mild overdrive tailored for single coils, according to Barber, due to
its single gain stage.

Barber:

"The new Gain Changer SR model improves warmth, clarity and note
separation. (...) Flick the toggle one way and you have sweet very
low-gain overdrive, flick it the other way and you get wildly charged
harmonic content of our much praised unLimiTeD distortion. Pop over to
the other toggle-switch and you can volley between the flat sweet-EQ of
the LTD SR, the vintage snarling fat-EQ of our classic LTD v2 or a new
voice that combines flat EQ with a little added fatness. Combine all
these different options together and you have a super-versatile harmonic
beast."

"The Gain-Changer SR was designed to be a highly versatile and compact
overdrive pedal. Barber Electronics has incorporated sounds from our
classic LTD, LTD SR and Unlimited pedals into the Gain-Changer SR in
order to solve most guitar player’s overdrive needs in one small pedal.

The toggle switch on the left is the “EQ switch”. This switch allows you
to go from flat-EQ like our LTD SR pedal (toggle switched to the right),
to thick-mid-EQ like our LTD v2 (toggle in the middle), to a setting
that sounds “flat+fat” (toggle switched to the left). The “flat+fat”
setting is meant to give you a “nearly flat EQ” sound, but with added
fundamentals to help keep the guitar “in the mix. The Right toggle is
the “Gain Switch.” This switch goes from the med/high gain of our
Unlimited pedal (toggle set to the left) to the low gain of our LTD
series of pedals (toggle set to the right)."

    Bryan Ewold • PJ and the Beard • Brett Papa • Prymaxe • Haar Guitars 1 • Haar Guitars 2

PI FUZZ (Electro-Harmonix Big Muff Pi, current)

[X Pi.jpg]

Original forum thread

The Big Muff is one of the most popular fuzz boxes ever. Many famous
players used one at some time in their careers: Carlos Santana, David
Gilmour (“Comfortably Numb”), Smashing Pumpkins (“Cherub Rock”), Jack
White, Jimi Hendrix, Black Keys, etc. It wasn’t used on “American Woman”
as often assumed, but you can hear it on "Goodbye to Love” (Carpenters).
The Big Muff made a comeback in the Stoner and Doom rock scenes. The
pedal cascades a fuzz circuit into additional gain stages. This results
in long and smooth sustain and a dark tone. Less spitty when compared to
other fuzzes. Because of all that saturation, it sounds best into a
clean amp. It can be used with a bass too. Electro-Harmonix released the
Big Muff Pi with its four silicon transistors in 1969. Its owner
Matthews states that this points to the muffled tone, but there are
other explanations of a more naughty nature.

  “Hendrix and Santana were among the first to get a piece of the Pi,
  and for over 40 years the Big Muff Pi has been defining the sound of
  rock guitar. Revered by contemporary guitarists and rock legends for
  its rich, creamy, violin-like sustain, from Pink Floyd to The White
  Stripes, everyone still wants a piece of the Pi!” Electro-Harmonix

  “The Big Muff Pi (π), often known simply as the Big Muff, is a fuzzbox
  produced in New York City by the Electro-Harmonix company, along with
  their Russian sister company Sovtek, primarily for use with the
  electric guitar. It is used by bassists as well due to the Big Muff's
  low-end frequency response.” Wikipedia

EHX went out of business in the ‘80s. Its owner Matthews relaunched it
from Russia (as: Sovtek) in the ‘90s and took the company back to the
USA. There’s an interview with Matthews about this period in the book
Pedal Crush – Stompbox Effects For Creative Music Making.

The Big Muff has seen many versions, as described here and here, and new
versions are still being released, below and above $100. The first
version (aka Triangle or V1) and second version (aka Ram’s Head or V2)
are generally considered to be the most sought-after, but the Russian
edition is also popular. Many clones exist. JHS Pedals' Muffuletta
reproduces the sound of 5 versions of the Big Muff.

ElectroSmash • Audiofanzine • How to Use Big Muffs to Dial-In the Tone
of Five Famous Guitarists • Brief History of Fuzz • Gitarre & Bass
(German) • Schematic • EHX forum • Pedal Town • Anasounds • Guide to the
Electro-Harmonix Big Muff

The pedal has three controls: Volume, Tone and Sustain.

In current Fractal Audio firmware, the PI Fuzz model is based on the
current version. There are separate models of the Triangle, Russian and
Ram's Head pedals. [24]

The models have a “Wicker” switch which removes the feedback capacitors,
and a “Tone” switch which allows bypassing the tone circuitry.

The Muff typically has a scoop around 1000 Hz. To prevent the model from
disappearing in the mix, turn up the mids, using the tone controls or
the graphic EQ in the Drive block. Another trick is to precede the Big
Muff with an overdrive. The PI Fuzz is featured in some factory presets.
Search this wiki page for “PI Fuzz”.

    Peter Stroud • Jack White in “It Might Get Loud” • Reverb.com • Comparing 6 varieties • ProGuitarShop • Big Muff Comparison • Gearmanndude • Triangle Big Muff Reissue • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • Vintage vs Reissue (JHS) • blondegraymey • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • Dave Webb

PI FUZZ - BASS (Electro-Harmonix Deluxe Bass Big Muff)

See above.

Acording to RHX: "Thunderous bass fuzz with crossover control and
expanded I/O in the most versitile Bass Big Muff ever!. The EHX Deluxe
Bass Big Muff is the flagship of EHX bass fuzz and delivers enhancements
to the classic Bass Big Muff Pi that are specifically tailored to the
needs of the modern bass player. The sturdy foundation of the Deluxe
Bass Big Muff is the thunderous tone insprired by the classic Black
Russian Big Muff of the ’90s. Added to that is a Blend knob to mix back
in your original tone and add definition to your low end. A Gate quiets
unwanted hiss for a smooth performance. The ultimate tone-scultor of the
pedal is the Crossover section. Here the Fuzz and Dry signals are
seperated and run though a High Pass Filter and Low Pass Filter
respectively. This creates a tone with fiery top and and a huge,
thumping bottom. This is the most versitile Bass Big Muff ever!"

    EHX demo

PI FUZZ - TRIANGLE (Electro-Harmonix 1971 Big Muff Pi Triangle)

See above. Based on a 1971 “Triangle” Big Muff PI. Includes the Tone
Wicker mods.

    EHX • Sam Goffen • Middle Aged Gear Junkie

PI FUZZ - RAM'S HEAD (Electro-Harmonix '70s Big Muff Pi Ram's Head)

See above. Based on a mid-70’s “Ram’s Head” Big Muff PI. Includes the
Tone Wicker mods.

The Ram's Head was the 'inspiration' for the 1973 Colorsound Tone
Bender, also modeled by Fractal Audio.

  "The tone control on the Ram's Head does is awesome. Change it up when
  you record doubles or triples for tones with the bulk and presence of
  a giant Pleistocene mammal. Tip 2: Turn up Low Cut (EQ2 page) on this
  model and it becomes a bit more forgiving of the thumps you feed it.”
  Fractal Audio

    Jack Fossett • Premier Guitar • Gilmourish

PI FUZZ - RUSSIAN (Electro-Harmonix Russian Big Muff Pi)

See above. Based on a "Russian” Big Muff PI. Includes the Tone Wicker
mods.

  "It has a much different sound. More bassy and mellower.” Fractal
  Audio

    Beers N Gears • Reverb • Guitologist

PLUS DISTORTION (Distortion +)

[X Plus.jpg]

Original forum thread

MXR, now owned by Jim Dunlop, was one of the largest effects
manufacturers in the ‘70s and ‘80s. Several of their products are now
considered classics: Dynacomp, Phase 90 and 100, Flanger, etc. The
Distortion + (M104) was released in 1973. The “+” refers to the purpose
of this pedal: adding more distortion to an already overdriven amp.
Famous users include Randy Rhoads, Steve Vai (in the movie “Crossroads”)
and Radiohead’s Thom Yorke. Just like MXR’s Phase 90, early “script
logo” versions of the pedal are appreciated more than the later “block
logo” version. The current version costs around $80. It was MXR’s second
pedal release and the first distortion pedal based on an op-amp,
although there’s some debate. The pedal’s hard-clipping distortion is
raspy and loose, almost fuzzy at high gain settings, like overloading
the inputs of a console. The circuit is said to be like that of the DOD
250 (also modeled by Fractal Audio), although the sound is different. '

  “This little yellow box is responsible for those great distortion
  sounds heard on so many classic recordings. Set the Distortion control
  low and crank the Output knob to drive the front end of your amp for
  cool blues tones, or max out the Distortion knob for classic early
  ’80s hard rock tone. There still isn't any distortion unit on the
  market that sounds like the Distortion+. Germanium-powered,
  soft-clipped distortion. Go from warm, tubey overdrive to gnarly fuzz.
  Classic early ’80s hard rock tone.” MXR

  “The MXR Distortion + ("Distortion Plus") is a distortion pedal
  originally designed in the 1970s by MXR Innovations. As its name
  implies "distortion," it's a 'distortion' (parallel clipping) but has
  a rather mild sound. It has been cloned many times, most famously by
  the DOD 250 Overdrive (a distortion). The pedal uses a single op-amp
  and a pair of germanium diodes to ground (parallel-push) for clipping
  in a very simple configuration with only Output and Distortion
  controls, no tone control; the pedal uses no discrete transistors.
  Turning up the Distortion control increases the amount of distortion
  and at the same time cuts some bass from the signal. This pedal is
  perhaps best known for its crunchy heavy metal sound that was featured
  by Randy Rhoads in his work with Ozzy Osbourne. Jerry Garcia of the
  Grateful Dead used this pedal exclusively for distortion in the late
  1970s. Bob Mould of Hüsker Dü also used the Distortion + as part of
  his trademark guitar sound. Dave Murray of Iron Maiden has used
  Distortion + since the early 1980s. Thom Yorke of Radiohead has
  included the + for many of his signature distortion sounds, using a
  variety of guitars to achieve various tonal options.” Wikipedia

Electrosmash • Tonehome

The pedal’s controls are Output and Distortion. The pedal works best
into an amplifier that's on the verge of breakup or already overdriven.
Try Drive at 7 and Level at 8.

  "It's not a boost. It's a very simple distortion circuit with no
  output buffer. Typically you need to turn the Output knob up quite a
  bit.” Fractal Audio

    Dunlop • ProGuitarShop • Brett Kingman • MXR Distortion plus vs vintage • Dweezil Zappa • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS) • How MXR Changed Pedals (JHS) • Jack Fossett • shnobel • Are you making this mistake with OD250 or Distortion+? (Wampler)

RAT DISTORTION (Pro Co RAT)

[X RAT.jpg]

Original forum thread

The RAT is a famous distortion pedal by Pro Co. The black box is easily
recognizable. Famous users include David Gilmour, Noel Gallagher, Arctic
Monkeys, Jeff Beck, Radiohead, and Kurt Cobain. Nuno Bettencourt never
plays without a RAT; his signature Randall amp had one built-in. The RAT
was a sign of changing times, with guitar players looking for ways to
get more distortion than the MXR Distortion + (also modeled by Fractal
Audio) delivered. The RAT was born out of an accident, according to
Reverb.com. A wrong transistor was connected to a circuit board. The RAT
can sound harsh and into-your-face. The passive Filter knob is crucial
to its tone. In the first versions it was a conventional tone control,
which was changed to a treble roll-off later. Make sure to experiment
with it in the model but be aware: it works the opposite way of the real
pedal. With a clean amp, the RAT can also sound a little fuzzy,
especially on the lower notes. Fractal Audio’s model of the 1981
Inventions DRV pedal may be a better match with real clean amps. Because
of its hybrid fuzz/distortion character, it’s sometimes referred to as
the counterpart of the Big Muff (also modeled by Fractal Audio). Where
the Big Muff covers the fuzzy spectrum, the distortion wins the battle
in the RAT. It’s also said that the RAT is not that far off from the
Boss DS-1 (also modeled by Fractal Audio). The RAT seems to sound best
through mid-heavy amplifiers like VOX, because of the pedal’s scooped
frequency curve. It also works on bass, as proven by Nirvana.

Pro Co produced many versions of the RAT, including the popular 1983
“white-on-black” version, ’87 RAT 2, ’89 Turbo RAT, FAT RAT, You Dirty
RAT, BRAT, Deucetone RAT and others. Many other pedal manufacturers,
including Wampler and JHS, have build clones or RAT-inspired pedals. The
$250 1981 Inventions DRV pedal, also modeled by Fractal Audio (“MCMLXXXI
DRV”), is a boutique clone of the RAT with less gain, which sounds
better with clean amps than the RAT does.

RAT website • Coolest Versions of the ProCo RAT (Tone Report) • Pro Co
Rat Analysis (ElectroSmash) • Is This the Best Distortion Pedal of All
Time? • History of the ProCO RAT Pedal and Myth Debunked (JHS) • RAT
clones You’ve Never Seen Before • schematic.

  “The RAT is a guitar effects pedal produced by Pro Co Sound. The
  original RAT was developed in the basement of Pro Co's Kalamazoo,
  Michigan facility in 1978. Numerous variations of the original RAT
  pedal are still being produced today. The basic RAT has changed in
  appearance over the years, but its tone has remained largely the same.
  Pro Co has also introduced tonal variations of the RAT, including the
  Turbo RAT, and You Dirty RAT, among others. The Pro Co RAT became very
  popular in the early 1980s, thanks in part to fame gained by its use
  by several artists. It is a distortion pedal with a quite simple
  circuit, which can be broken down into four simpler blocks: distortion
  stage, tone control, output stage and power supply. The design is
  based around a single opamp, originally the Motorola LM308 (switched
  to Texas Instruments OP07DP around 2002-2003). The distortion is
  produced using a variable gain circuit with diodes shorting the output
  to ground to produce hard clipping of the input waveform. (...) This
  construction method is similar to the Boss DS-1 distortion pedal,
  although there are major differences between the two circuits. A major
  difference is the opamp used (the LM308), known for its poor slew
  rate; it largely accounts for the sonic difference between the two
  pedals.” Wikipedia

Nuno's RAT:

[Nuno.jpg]

The classic RAT pedal has three knobs: Distortion, Filter (roll-off
filter), Volume. Nuno sets the Distortion really low.

The op-amp-based Rat Distortion model lends itself well for
experimenting with different clip types, because the clipping stage
isn’t affecting or affected by other parts of the circuit. This model is
also often used to soften the Synth block, adding sustain and
smoothness. Fractal Audio’s Fat Rat model is based on LED
(light-emitting diode) clipping. Those little lights can be used for
intentional signal clipping, creating distortion. LEDs have a lot of
headroom and are less fizzy and louder than other diodes. Video: test
different clipping modes for diy pedals

The RAT is featured in some factory presets. Search this wiki page for
“RAT”.

    Vintage Rat vs Newer Rat (shnobel) • That Pedal Show • 1988 ProCo Rat 1 • Big Box Rat 1983 vs Rat 1986 (shnobel) • 1985 RAT vs JHS Angry Charlie (shnobel) • 1986 RAT with Fender Jazz Bass through Ampeg SVT • 1988 ProCo Rat 2 (Reverb) • gearmanndude • gearmanndude: JHS ProCo RAT2 Rat Pack Mod • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • 10 Rare Pedals (JHS) • 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS) • Every RAT Pedal You’ll Ever Need (JHS) • History of the ProCO RAT Pedal and Myth Debunked (JHS) • Let’s talk about the Rat Distortion pedal (Wampler) • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion • Original versus the Others • 4 Tips How You Can Use The ProCo Rat 2 Distortion • Ola Englund • [25] • Revv Amps • Michael Nielsen • John Cordy

ROYAL BASS DI (Noble Bass Preamp DI)

For bass players.

The model has been modified with more gain so that it can be overdriven.
With the Drive knob at 5.00 the gain is the same as the actual preamp.
Also, instead of a Low Cut switch, the model uses an adjustable Low Cut
control. More info to be added.

According to Noble: "Bass guitar sounds best through tubes, especially
when running direct! Tubes distort gradually with low-order harmonics,
which are perfect musical intervals. The second harmonic is an octave,
the third harmonic is a fifth above the octave, the fourth harmonic is a
second octave, etc. This is the reason tubes sound so good, and you will
notice it. Their subtle distortion provides the natural harmonics
lacking in electronic instruments, and restores the dimension and feel
of your bass as it was intended to be heard. (...) The Noble preamp DI
turns your laptop and portable recording interface into a tube-driven
channel strip with a super low noise floor and an unbeatable vintage
sound. And the ultra high 10MegΩ input impedance won't load down piezo
pickups, so it's great on acoustic instruments as well. (...) ur classic
2.5 band EQ was designed by musicians and is loved by engineers for how
well it sits in the mix. The intuitive bass and treble controls quickly
brighten or fatten your sound for high end clarity or low end thump. The
low cut switch rolls off -6dB per octave below 90Hz to add more punch
and girth in the low mids and leave room in the mix for the kick drum."

    Noble demo

SDD PREAMP (Korg SDD-3000 preamp)

[X SDD.jpg]

Original forum thread

When Fractal Audio added the SDD Preamp model, it was public knowledge
that The Edge (U2) had started using Fractal Audio gear. The Edge is
known for being a fan of the Korg SDD-3000 digital delay. There might be
some correlation between The Edge’s use of Fractal Audio gear and the
addition of this model. The SDD-3000 is a low-resolution (13-bit) 19”
op-amp digital delay, released in 1982. Its embracement by The Edge
contributed greatly to its popularity. The built-in preamp has a
character of its own. The Edge reportedly runs the SDD-3000 even without
its delays, just for its warm-sounding preamp. There are no specific
preamp controls on the original device, except for an input level
control and attenuator switches. Unlike the preamp in the Echoplex
delay, there aren't many clones of the SDD-3000’s preamp. The SDD-3000
has been reissued by Korg as a pedal, with the help of Dallas Schoo
(pronounce: "shoe"), The Edge’s guitar tech. The pedal received mixed
reviews, but Peter Frampton used it.

SDD-3000 preamp pedal • service manual

Fractal Audio’s SDD Preamp model can be used as a clean boost. Its main
attraction is its ability to compress the signal a little, add some
sparkle to the sound without getting harsh and tighten the bass a bit.
It enhances the tone, adds warmth and chime, and makes highs jump out
and tingle, reminiscent of The Edge’s signature tone. You can also use
it for distortion, if desired, by cranking the Drive control. The model
is featured in some factory presets. Search this wiki page for “SDD”.

    Dallas Schoo (U2 guitar tech) • mick3b1g • Korg SDD-3000 Preamp  • schnobel

SHIMMER DRIVE (custom model)

[Logo.jpg]

Fractal Audio has created a couple of custom models. These virtual
drives have no real-life equivalents. They solely exist within Fractal
Audio’s processors, implementing Fractal Audio’s ideas and improvements
on existing pedals. The “silicon” Shimmer Drive is such a model. Its
purpose is to boost amp models which are based on amplifiers without a
master volume, like certain amplifiers made by Vox, Fender, and
Marshall. It has gained a lot of popularity among Fractal Audio users.
It very transparent and works well with both clean and dirty amps, just
set Drive accordingly. Also, this drive model requires less CPU power
than many other models. Start with the Drive control set really low,
compensate with Level and turn down Tone a little. The model is featured
in some factory presets. Search this wiki page for “Shimmer Drive”. The
model is also available as an input boost type in the Amp block.

  "The Shimmer Drive is my own creation. It is primarily intended to be
  used as a boost for Non-MV amps like AC-15/30's, Fenders and Plexis.”
  Fractal Audio

SHRED DISTORTION (Marshall Shredmaster)

[X Shred.jpg]

Original forum thread

In the ‘90s Marshall released the Shredmaster pedal (together with the
Drivemaster and Bluesbreaker pedals). By today’s standards it isn’t
really a metal pedal for shredders. But it is high gain. Marshall was
aiming for the sound of a Marshall JCM-900 amplifier. It hasn’t received
as much appreciation as Marshall’s Bluesbreaker pedal from the same era,
but it did become more popular after Radiohead’s Johnny Greenwood had
started using it. Reportedly, it’s used in the chorus of “Creep”. It was
also used by Blur, Supergrass and Manic Street Preachers.

Guitar Tone Overload: Discontinued Greats • Honest Distortion • ToneHome

The pedal has these controls: Gain, Bass, Treble, Contour (changes the
character of the mids, scoops the tone) and Volume. The Contour knob is
crucial. To get Metal Zone-type tones, crank it. Also, turn up gain and
keep Level low.

In 2023 Marshall released a series of reissues including the
Shredmaster.

Fractal Audio's model is based on the original version.

    Marshall Vintage Reissue Pedals • blondegraemey • with an Engl Powerball • The SuperFunAwesomeHappyTime Pedal Show! • Marshall Shred Master vs Boss MT-2 Metal Zone • Marshall’s Greatest Pedals (JHS) • with a Fender Champ • Guitar Center • Guitar Bonedo • Peach Guitars • Ola Englund • Pedal Pawn

SONIC DRIVE (Maxon/Ibanez SD-9 Sonic Distortion)

[X SD9.jpg]

Original forum thread

This pedal is from the same era and series as the Ibanez TS9 Tube
Screamer. It’s a dual-diode op-amp distortion, not an overdrive, and can
even cross into fuzz territory. It scoops the mids instead of boosting
them, depending on the position of the Tone knob. It’s especially
appreciated in the fusion scene, including Mike Landau, and Scott
Henderson is sort of its ambassador. Ibanez released a modded version:
SD9M. These days Maxon manufactures the SD9 as part of their Nine
Series. Analog Mike sells a modded version.

  "Since its original release in the early 80’s the Sonic Distortion has
  gained a huge cult following among tone connoisseurs, including the
  likes of guitar legends Scott Henderson and Mike Landau. Maxon’s
  current-production reissue captures all the magic of the original with
  the added benefit of true bypass switching. The SD-9 provides a smooth
  distortion that covers a wide range of Gain levels from mild overdrive
  through pseudo-fuzz. Regardless of the Gain setting, the SD-9 remains
  articulate and responsive to note dynamics, providing excellent
  sustain without crossing over into super-compressed Metal territory.
  The SD-9’s Tone knob has plenty of top end on tap, yet notes still
  retain a round, full-bodied tonality with the low end presence usually
  associated with amp distortion. The pedal’s midrange response is
  smooth and even – present without seeming spiked. Since its humble
  origins to its current place in the pedalboards of the stars, the
  Maxon Sonic Distortion has proven itself to be a timeless classic that
  has only improved with age."' Maxon

  "It's sort of like a dist+ (your ross) with a big muff tone circuit. I
  like them a lot but the tone circuit loses all the low end if you turn
  up the tone knob, so most people leave the tone knob down. Or they can
  be modded to make the tone circuit better and also a midrange knob can
  be added to get rid of the scooped mids if desired." Analog Man

  "The Maxon SD-9 is the best distortion pedal EVER made, period. It has
  the clarity and punch you get from a pedal, while retaining the low
  bass you get with amp distortion. The SD-9 is one of the rare pedals
  which sound equally great on both the neck and bridge pickups, whether
  they're humbucking or single coil. It's been a very important part of
  my tone for many years." Scott Henderson

Legendary Tones • Maxon Scott Henderson SD-9SH • Graphs of the Tone knob
settings by Analog Mike

The pedal has the usual three controls: Distortion, Tone and Level. The
Tone knob covers a very wide range, on the real pedal as well as in
Fractal Audio’s "Sonic Drive" model. Turning it down is crucial because
it avoids shrill tones and loss of bass (unless you want to use the
pedal as a treble booster). Use the guitar’s volume and tone knobs to
finetune the sound. Try this: Drive 2.25, Tone 2.75, Level 7.25. The
model is featured in some factory presets. Search this wiki page for
“Sonic Drive”.

    Scott Henderson • SD9 Test/Demo • blondegraemey • Ariel Pozzo • PMTVUK • SD9M Modification • DutchGuitarDude • Dani Rabin • OZ NOY • History Of Guitar Distortion (JHS) • 1970’s Op-Amp Distortion (JHS) • Godlyke • Michael Nielsen • Leon Todd

SUHR RIOT GE (R) (Suhr Riot)

[X Riot.jpg]

Original forum thread

John Suhr started his company JS Technologies, after having worked with
Bob Bradshaw and Fender. Suhr is known for his high-end guitars, amps,
pedals, pickups etc. Read more about his amplifiers in the Yek's Guide
to the Fractal Audio Amp Models. Suhr’s Riot pedal can turn a clean or
slightly dirty amp into a high gain beast. It’s often praised for
sounding like a real tube amp, so it falls in the “amp-in-a-box”
category. A later version, “Riot Reloaded”, offers more gain, and
there’s also a “mini” version. It's been said that MI Audio's Crunch Box
was the inspiration for the Riot, and they do sound similar.

  “Riot is a versatile high-gain distortion pedal with the sonic
  characteristics and touch sensitivity of a high quality 100 watt tube
  amplifier.” Suhr

The pedal has these controls (more information in the manual):
Distortion, Level, Tone (treble roll-off) and three-way voicing switch.
With the switch to the left (red LED), the sound is natural and organic
and it responds dynamically to your guitars volume control. In the
middle position (blue LED + Silicon diode) it's high gain territory with
a solid midrange and a tight bottom end. Switched to the right
(Germanium diode, symmetrical), the pedal has a vintage high gain
response with excellent definition.

Fractal Audio’s model is based on the original pedal. The names of the
three models (originally named “Ruckus”) reflect the settings of the
Voice switch. Start with the LED/Si (M) model, use a moderate Drive
setting and turn up Level. The models are featured in some factory
presets. Search this wiki page for “Riot”.

    Riot into a Clean Amp • Riot into an Overdriven Amp • That Pedal Show • Ian Thornley • Pete Thorn • Mark Day • John Cordy • Sasha Ivantic

SUHR RIOT LED (L) (Suhr Riot)

See above, LED voicing (switch to the left).

SUHR RIOT LED/SI (M) (Suhr Riot)

See above, hybrid LED/Silicon Diode voicing (switch in the middle).

SUNRISE SPLENDOR (JHS Pedals Morning Glory V4)

[Morning glory v4.jpg]

The Morning Glory started as a modded Marshall Bluesbreaker and grew
from there. It's a natural and crispy sounding low-to-medium overdrive.
V4 was released in 2016.

Controls: Volume, Drive, Tone, Gain switch (boost), High Cut switch.

Separate models have the High Cut switch engaged or disengaged.

    JHS Pedal Morning Glory V4 (JHS) • The Story of the JHS Morning Glory (JHS) • ProGuitarShop • Marshall Blues Breaker Style Overdrive Pedals (That Pedal Show) • My Favorite JHS Pedals (JHS) • Andrewmusikx • Living Room GD

SUNRISE SPLENDOR HI-CUT

See above. High Cut switch disengaged.

SUPER FUZZ (Univox Super-Fuzz)

[Superfuzz.jpg]

From Wikipedia:

The original was designed in the late 1960s by the Japanese company
Honey in the form of a (now extremely rare) multi effect called the
Honey Psychedelic Machine. It was taken out and manufactured as a
separate fuzz effect: Baby Crying Fuzz" FY-6. Honey was bought by
Shin-Ei. The USA importer was Univox that marketed the pedal first as
the Uni-Fuzz. Around 1970 the look changed to the version with the large
rubber pad on the top and the name Super-Fuzz. The black/grey version
around 1972 is the most sought-after version. The Super-Fuzz was also
part of the Shin-Ei Fuzz Wah. ShinEi still makes the pedal today. The
Super-Fuzz is used by many classic and modern bands and artists. The
Behringer SF300 and Boss Hyper Fuzz are clones.

More history:

- Coda Effects
- Vintage Guitar
- Premier Guitar
- Shin-Ei

It's an octave fuzz, using two germanium diodes to produce square wave
clipping. Controls: Balance (volume), Expander (fuzz), two-position tone
switch. The full-wave rectification of the circuit produces an upper
octave as well as a slight lower octave. It can give the sound a lot of
compression and a mild ring modulator effect.

The tone switch engages a 1 kHz filter that "scoops" the mids, giving a
very fat, almost bassy tone, unique to this circuit. The Tone control in
Fractal Audio's model varies the frequency of the notch.

Later versions of the original pedal feature an internal trim pot for
controlling the octave balance. Use the Bias control in Fractal Audio's
to simulate this.

    Reverb • Chris Jaxon • demo • gearmanndude • gearmanndude • JHS • Shin-Ei

SUPER OD (BOSS SD-1 Super OverDrive)

[X SD1.jpg]

Original forum thread

Dating back to 1981, this still is one of BOSS’ best-selling pedals. And
rightfully so. It is the successor to the legendary '77 OD-1 (also
yellow, also modeled by Fractal Audio). The SD-1 added a tone control.
Contrary to the Tube Screamer, the SD-1 features asymmetrical clipping
which is the type of clipping that occurs in tube amplifiers. The bottom
and top of the waveform are clipped differently, favoring even-order
harmonics. It's often said that because of this, the sweet sound of the
SD-1 complements an amplifier, rather than changing it. The pedal
doesn't provide that much gain, it isn't a distortion pedal. You can use
it to drive a clean amp into blues territory, or to push an already
distorted amp. With Drive turned down all the way and Level turned fully
up, the SD-1 fattens the amp's own distortion and tightens the bass.
It’s somewhat more aggressive than a Tube Screamer. And it does so
admirably, as demonstrated by Zakk Wylde. He used it for a long time and
his own signature overdrive pedal from MXR is based on it. Also
contributing to its popularity is its amazing cheap price. You can buy
one for $50 and create a tone that competes with boutique overdrives.
There’s also a Waza Craft version: SD-1W. And in 2021 Boss released a
40th anniversary edition (SD-1 4a) with different cosmetics (more info).

  "The SD-1 Super OverDrive pedal produces the warm, natural distortion
  of an overdriven tube amplifier while maintaining the subtle nuances
  of a player's picking technique. This is one of BOSS' more subtle and
  smooth overdrive pedals, perfect for blues and rock." BOSS

  "Unique asymmetric overdrive circuitry for a classic, natural tube amp
  growl.”

  "The OD-1 didn’t have a tone control so the engineers felt that the
  tonal range was limited because of this. As an answer to the problem
  they came up with the SD-1. Comparing the two circuits reveals that
  they are very closely related and using the exact same overdrive
  circuit. When comparing the sound of the two pedals side by side, it
  is however obvious that they’re not identical. Opinions are divided
  when it comes to the question, which one sounds best, but there is no
  doubt that they’re both legendary overdrive pedals.” Bossarea

Comparison between the SD-1 and the MXR Wylde OD

  "Early SD-1s used 1S1588 diodes. Later models used 1N916 and 1N4148.
  Our reference pedal has 1N916.” Fractal Audio

40 Years of the BOSS SD-1 Super Overdrive • Gitarre & Bass (German) •
ToneHome • The drive pedal of choice for Zakk Wylde and Josh Homme

The SD-1 has these controls: Drive, Tone and Level. Josh Homme (Queens
of the Stone Age) uses the SD-1 in a particular way: he turns up Tone
all the way, and Drive all the way down, effectively turning it into a
kind of treble booster. Zakk Wilde sets everything at one o'clock.

The model is featured in some factory presets. Search this wiki page for
“Super OD”. The Super OD model is also available as an input boost type
in the Amp block.

    Leon Todd: Zakk Wylde's SD-1 Settings • BOSSchannel 1 • BOSSchannel 2 • SD-1W BOSSchannel 3  • BOSSchannel 4 • ProGuitarShop • Leon Todd: 10 Drive Pedals Compared • Leon Todd: Boss SD-1 vs Wylde OD • Sweetwater • Japan vs Taiwan • BK Butler Tube Driver vs TS9 vs SD1 • Boss Is Best (JHS) • Must Have Guitar Rig Essentials (JHS) • intheblues • Studio Rats: SD-1 versus TS • PMTVUK 1 • PMTVUK 2

SWEDISH METAL (BOSS Waza Craft HM-2W Heavy Metal)

The original pedal from the '80s was originally designed to reproduce
the mid-boosted sound of a cranked Marshall stack. But it reached
legendary status for its “chainsaw” or “buzzsaw” sound with all controls
cranked (including 20dB level boost) and was used heavily in the
“Swedish school of death metal” with bands like Nihilist and Entombed,
and later in other genres too (David Gilmour, shoegaze). Its successors
were the HM-3 Hyper Metal, and the MT-2 Metal Zone (also modeled). The
Waza Craft reissue of the HM-2 added gain and lowered noise.

“You don’t need to be so fussy about which amp you’re using with an
HM-2. You could plug it into a toaster, and it’d still sound like an
HM-2. They’re incredibly consistent sounding.” [26]

The controls are: Level, Color Mix L and H, and Distortion.

More information:

- Reverb: The Story of the HM-2: The Dark Side of Boss
- Bossinfo: HM-2: The Sound of Swedish Death Metal and Beyond
- Stringjoy: The Boss HM-2 and the Birth of the Chainsaw Sound
- Catalinbread

This pedal was one of the most requested models by Fractal Audio forum
members ever and the model has been added in 2026. It uses the 1S2473
diode model.

  "The reference pedal is a Waza Craft version." Fractal Audio

    Reverb • Guitar Interactive Magazine • Ola Englund • Leon Todd • Session Heroes • Science of Loud • Ola Englund: Swedish death metal • Leon Todd

T808 OD (Ibanez TS-808 Tube Screamer)

[X TS.jpg]

Original forum thread

The holy grail of overdrive pedals and a key component of Stevie Ray
Vaughan’s signature sound. One of his Tube Screamers listed for $11.000
in 2016. Other users include John Mayer, Eric Johnson, The Edge, Gary
Moore, David Gilmour, Trey Anastasio, Adam Levine, Brent Mason, and
probably half of all players out there. The first popular version was
the (now very rare) ’79 Overdrive Pro TS-808. Also referred to as
“narrow box” because of its small switch. In 2014 Ibanez made the
TS-80835TH reissue to celebrate 35 years of Tube Screamers. The “narrow
box“ was followed in ’80 by the larger Overdrive Pro TS808 (without
hyphen). It carried the legendary JRC 4558D chip and other improvements.
This one is considered to sound the best, and people are willing to pay
the price for it. The ’82 TS9, better looking with a larger footswitch,
a differently named 4558 chip and a couple of different resistors but
otherwise the same circuit, sounds very similar to the TS808, with a bit
more presence. It can be modified to sound exactly like an 808. The 808
and TS9 are the most coveted originals but many versions, reissues and
anniversary editions followed. Originally vintage Tube Screamers were
made for Ibanez by Nisshin/Maxon. The collaboration ended in 2002. Maxon
now carry their own line; see the section about the Maxoff model. 

  "The Ibanez Tube Screamer is a guitar overdrive pedal, made by Ibanez.
  The pedal has a characteristic mid-boosted tone popular with blues
  players. The "legendary" Tube Screamer has been used by guitarists
  such as Stevie Ray Vaughan to create their signature sound, and is one
  of the most popular and most copied overdrive pedal." Wikipedia

[Ts book.jpg]

The Tube Screamer’s unique feature is its mid-hump: it emphasizes the
middle frequencies which makes it a favorite of many blues players. They
often play through Fender amps and many of these are slightly scooped in
the middle frequencies area. The pedal helps cutting through the mix.
Another feature of the Tube Screamer is that some of the original clean
signal is mixed in at its clipping stage, which improves dynamics and
clarity. Tube Screamers are also used by rock players to tighten the
amp's distortion, because the pedal cuts bass into the amplifier. Even
Stevie Ray Vaughan used a Tube Screamer (or two in series) to boost his
already overdriven amps, with Drive set low and Level set high. Another
approach with high gain amps is to crank Drive and Level and turn down
Tone all the way, which is what Mark Tremonti does. Pedal builders like
Analog Man and Robert Keeley offer modding services for Tube Screamers,
increasing gain and bass. Many manufacturers also design pedals based on
the Tube Screamer. JHS Pedals’ Bonsai pedal provides many different Tube
Screamer flavors in a single pedal. The Tube Screamer uses symmetrical
clipping, as opposed to asymmetrical clipping used in the BOSS OD-1, the
competitor at the time (released one year before the Tube Screamer), and
its successor the BOSS SD-1. It’s said that the choice for symmetrical
clipping was made because of the already existing patent of BOSS on
solid-state asymmetrical clipping.  

  “If you look at the schematic between a Tube Screamer and a Boss OD-1,
  they’re almost exactly the same thing,” Lomas says. “The OD-1, though,
  is what they call an asymmetrical clipper. When you put a signal in
  it, it does not distort the top and bottom of the soundwave the same.
  Instead, it distorts one differently—the way a tube would. The
  original Boss OverDrive was designed to be a tube simulator, which was
  really big back then because, of course, most amplifiers were starting
  to get away from tubes. They were solid-state, and they really sounded
  like shit. So, there was a market for tube-simulation pedals. I
  believe that’s probably why the Tube Screamer was named the Tube
  Screamer. The TS808 also differed from the OD-1 in that it had a Tone
  control, featured a common JRC 4558D integrated circuit (IC) chip, and
  had a small rectangular footswitch. “The Tube Screamer was really the
  first pedal I saw that had an IC in it,” says Lomas. “All the
  overdrives prior to the Tube Screamer were built around transistors.”
  Lomas contends that the sweet, vocal midrange sound the TS808 is known
  for has everything to do with that JRC4558D IC chip—which explains why
  Lomas and many other overdrive aficionados prefer the sound of the
  original over other permutations of the pedal.” Premier Guitar

Timeline:

- 1979-1982: TS-808, JRC4558D, Japan
- 1982-1985: TS-9, JRC4558D, NJM4558, JRC2043DD, TA75558, Japan
- 1984: ST9 Nine Series Super Tube Screamer, 2x JRC4558D
- 1985: STL (Super Tube Series), 2x JRC4558D, Japan
- 1986-1989: TS-10, JRC4558, MC4558, Japan and Taiwan
- 1989-1999: TS-5 Soundtank, TA75558, NJM4558, Taiwan
- 1993: TS9 Nine Series Reissue, TA75558, Japan
- 1996: TS-9 Reissue, TA75558 CE, Japan
- 1998: TS9DX Nine Series, TA75558
- 2000: TS-7 Tone-Lok, NJM4558, JRC4558D, Taiwan and China
- 2002: TS-9 Reissue (not Maxon anymore)
- 2004: TS-808 Reissue, JRC5458, JRC4588D, Japan
- 2008: TS 808HW, JRC4558, Japan
- 2010: TS9B Bass Tube Screamer
- 2012: TS-9 30th Anniversary, JRC4558
- 2014: TS808DX
- 2014: Ibanez TS-808 35TH (narrow box reissue), JRC4558
- 2015: Ibanez Tube Screamer Mini
- And more …

Analog Man • Geofex • Premier Guitar's History of the Tube Screamer •
ElectroSmash • Gitarre & Bass: Ibanez Tube Screamer Story (German) •
Gitarre & Bass: Ibanez Tube Screamer TS808HW (German) • Gitarre & Bass:
Ibanez TS-808 35TH (German)

The pedal has just three control: Drive, Tone (doesn’t affect the
mid-hump) and Level.

Like the pedal, Fractal Audio’s models of the Tube Screamer are popular.
The T808 models were originally based on a TS9DX but the current models
are based on the TS-808. The T808 MOD model incorporates virtual mods
for broader frequency range, more gain and more output level. The T808
models are also available as input boosts in the Amp block. The TS9DX +
and TS9DX Hot models are based on two modes of the ’98 TS9-DX Turbo Tube
Screamer with the original TA75558 chip plus four separate circuits
through a Mode switch. The “Hot” model replaces the diodes with LEDs and
has less gain than the + mode. The “+” mode(l) provides more gain and is
darker. The Valve Screamer VS9 model is based on a TS9.

  "The TS-808 used 1S1588 diodes. The TS-9 used 1N914 (equivalent to
  1N4148). The Axe-Fx III model is a TS-808 so it defaults to 1S1588.
  Our reference pedal is a TS-808.” Fractal Audio

    Tyler Grund • shnobel: TS9 vs TS 808 • That Pedal Show: 5 Modern Classic OD Pedals • That Pedal Show: Super Overdrive Or Tube Screamer? • Philip McKnight • shnobel: TS9 vs SD-1 • Tube Driver vs TS9 vs SD1] • Ibanez • Reverb • ProGuitarShop • gearmanndude: Ibanez TS9 • gearmanndude: JHS Bonsai • Vintage vs. New Tubescreamers (Wampler) • Stacking Tube Screamers (Wampler) • Do all tubescreamers sound the same? (Wampler) • Busting the myth about TS9 and TS808 circuits (Wampler) • Boss SD-1 vs Ibanez TS808 vs DOD 250 • Boss OD-1 & SD-1 vs Ibanez TS808 & TS9 • Diode-Based Overdrive and Distortion Effects • Bad Monkey vs Tube Screamer (JHS) • This Is Why I Think Tube Screamers Suck

T808 MOD (modded Ibanez TS-808 Tube Screamer)

See above.

TAPE DISTORTION (tape distortion)

[TDST.png]

Original forum thread

This model adds the tone print and distortion of an analog reel-to-reel
recorder. It doesn't add much distortion, but it compresses the sound
and makes it fat and chewy. Ritchie Blackmore is known for sending his
sound through a tape recorder in his old days, after ditching his treble
boosters. The model is also favored by some users to produce the sound
of the Xotic EP Booster.

Sound On Sound: Analogue Warmth • Ledger Note: What Is Tape Saturation?
• WoodyTone: Ritchie Blackmore’s Tone

Put the Tape Distortion model behind the Cab block for best results and
use the Drive parameter to set the amount of virtual tape distortion.
The “Tape Driver” or “Tape Drive” factory preset demonstrates this. Be
aware that it will sum a stereo signal to mono, including a stereo Cab
block. To prevent that, move it to right behind the Amp block.
Alternatively, use the Preamp simulation in the Cabinet block. It
provides similar tape and channel strip simulations, like “vintage” and
“tube”, without requiring a block on the grid.

The model can also be used to add an extra virtual tube gain stage to an
amp. Select the HV tube, keep Drive low and set Level as appropriate.

  "It's just a generic tape distortion simulator. I used an old Ampex EQ
  curve basically." Fractal Audio

  "The tape drive is meant to be used anywhere in the chain. I've been
  using it after the amp to fatten things up and it works well for that.
  Be careful though, the drive block is mono so you can get phase issues
  if you put it after a stereo effect." Fractal Audio

TIMOTHY DOWN (Paul Cochrane Timmy V4)

[X Timmy.jpg]

Original forum thread

First there was the Tim, a pedal like the Timmy, but in a larger
enclosure with a boost and effects loop. Its name was based on Tim The
Enchanter (reportedly), the wizard in Monty Python’s Holy Grail movie.
Timmy is Tim’s little brother, who has outlived its older sibling. Both
are hand-made pedals which originally couldn’t be bought from any shop.
They had to be ordered from the designer Paul Cochrane personally. Rave
reviews on The Gear Page and other internet forums contributed to long
waitlists. Boutique, but not expensive. These days MXR builds the pedal
($130). The Timmy is considered by some to be the best overdrive pedal
in the world, because of its extremely transparent, organic character
and responsive crunch. It goes along fine with single coils as well as
humbuckers, and stacks well with other overdrives. It can also operate
as a clean boost, with the controls turned down.

  “The MXR Timmy Overdrive provides a huge range of gritty, textured
  tones that enhance your rig’s sound while preserving its fundamental
  voice—and in an MXR mini housing, it’ll free up serious pedalboard
  space. The pedal’s based on a design from veteran pedal builder Paul
  Cochrane that’s widely celebrated among high level pros, from
  first-call Nashville player Kenny Greenberg to first-call L.A. player
  Lyle Workman to rockstar Brad Whitford. Thanks to Paul’s inventive
  implementation of clipping options and tone controls, the Timmy
  Overdrive is a dream come true for working guitar players. The Clip
  switch provides three different clipping styles for a multitude of
  scenarios, whether you need a big, bold always-on sound with a ton of
  headroom to slam the front end of your amp, a more compressed and
  saturated sound for fat chords, or anything in between. The Bass and
  Treble controls offer further refinement in two key ways. First,
  they’re cut-only, keeping your signal’s character intact while making
  it super easy to dial in a clean boost. Second, Paul wired the Bass
  control to affect your pre-OD signal so that you can your maintain low
  end at lower Gain settings and the Treble control to affect your
  post-OD signal so that you can adjust the top end to keep dirty
  settings smooth and musical. Finally, the MXR design team worked with
  Paul to select an op-amp that perfectly complements his expertly
  crafted design. They chose the LF353, a component well-respected by
  Dunlop engineers for providing high output, high gain, and hi-fi
  signal delivery. The resulting MXR Timmy Overdrive is a
  professional-grade must-have for players who want sweet, harmonic
  breakup that responds to playing dynamics and maintains a rig’s
  personality at a fraction of the standard pedal size.” MXR

There has been some controversy around pedals from other manufacturers,
accused of being exact copies/clones of the Timmy circuit, Danelectro’s
Cool Cat Transparent Overdrive V1 being one of them. This That Pedal
Show episode demonstrates the similarities between the Timmy, Jan Ray
and Amp Eleven. The Greer Lightspeed (also modeled by Fractal Audio)
reportedly is very similar to the Timmy too.

A Closer Look • Guitar World • Guitar World • Music Radar

The pedal’s controls are Bass (cuts bass as it goes clockwise), Gain,
Volume and Treble (cuts treble as it goes clockwise). A toggle switch
changes the diode configuration. Represented by the three models of this
pedal. The Bass controls cuts bass, start here to sculpt the sound. The
Bass control is pre-gain, while the Treble control is post-gain.

  “I have a blue one.” Fractal Audio

  “The tone controls are now faithful to the actual pedal and decrease
  bass/treble when turned clockwise." (firmware 13.x for the Axe-Fx III)

Fractal Audio provides three diode-based models of the pedal with the
3-way switch. The Up model features asymmetrical clipping, which seems
to be the preferred mode among users. The Med model has the least
compressed symmetrical clipping. The Down model delivers compressed
symmetrical clipping. With asymmetric clipping, the bottom and top of
the waveform are clipped differently, favoring even-order harmonics.
Symmetrical clipping can sound more dissonant.

In current firmware, the models are based on the pedal's V4 version.

  “Our new reference Timmy pedal matches the "V4" schematic." Fractal
  Audio

    Tim The Enchanter from Monty Python's The Holy Grail • Gearmanndude • Timmy versus Timmy • Brett Kingman • Livingroom Gear Demos • Bluesman • That Pedal Show: Dream Overdrives: Timmy, Jan Ray & Amp11 • intheblues • How Good is the Timmy Overdrive Pedal? • Reverb Tone Report • Riffs, Beards & Gear • Jan Ray versus Timmy • Leon Todd

TIMOTHY MID (Paul Cochrane Timmy V4)

See above, switch in middle position (symmetrical clipping).

TIMOTHY UP (Paul Cochrane Timmy V4)

See above, switch in top position (asymmetrical clipping).

TONE OF KINGS (Analog Man King of Tone)

[X KoT.jpg]

Original forum thread

Together with pedals such as the Klon, the King of Tone (aka KoT), made
by Analog Man (Mike Piera), is a pedal in high demand, even at its
current price of $265 (at the time of writing) for a new one. Used ones
sell for over $400. After ordering, it will take years to be shipped.
List of KoT players. Like a couple of other pedals / models covered on
this page, the KoT is a very transparent overdrive that preserves the
tone of the guitar. Not too dry, not too saturated. It aimes at natural
amp-like sounding overdrive. It can handle any kind of amp. It’s
originally based around the Marshall Bluesbreaker Mk II pedal (also
modeled by Fractal Audio), rather than the ubiquitous Tube Screamer
circuit. There have been several versions. V4, the current one, has been
unaltered since 2005.

  “We totally redid the circuit with different diodes, chips,
  capacitors, treble boost, modes- pretty much everything was changed.
  And of course the KOT is two pedal circuits in one box. So our KOT
  pedal is not much like, and does not sound much like a BB pedal
  anymore. Especially the clean or distortion modes are different, and
  the higher gain option changes it even more, making it more useful
  throughout the DRIVE knob range. We used the higher gain KOT circuit
  as the base for the Prince Of Tone which came out in 2012, and
  improved the DISTORTION mode also on the POT.

  The King Of Tone overdrive was designed to take an amp at reasonable
  settings, and make it sound like it would sound if it were naturally
  driven to pure, smooth, tube distortion. It was fine tuned with Jim's
  (Jim Weider) 1960s Fender Deluxe Reverb amp to duplicate the sound
  when his amp is singing, but at lower volume settings - to simulate
  the natural tube amp distortion of preamp and power tubes. It does the
  same thing on other amps like Vox, Marshall, etc, making them sing in
  their own voice. Jim's amp was modified by our good friend the late
  Cesar Diaz, and is about the best sounding Fender amp I have heard.
  Later on, I tested the KoT on my own 1966 Deluxe Reverb amp. My amp is
  stock, and does not sound that great when it's cranked up. It gets
  loud but not very warm or singing, a little harsh. My amp sounds MUCH
  better using the KoT for overdrive, then it sounds very close to Jim's
  amp.

  The KoT is one of the few overdrive pedals available that is NOT based
  on a Tube Screamer circuit. In OD mode, it has a little less drive
  available than a Tube Screamer. It has quite a bit more volume
  available than a Tube Screamer and The TONE control has a similar
  range. The KoT has less compression than a tube screamer, and also
  does not boost the mids or cut the low end as much. It does not have a
  large amount of distortion.

  Once we had a prototype that Jim liked and used on stage several
  times, I emailed the circuit to my collaborator in Japan, Ohbayashi
  san, and he tried several ideas I gave him. CAMTAC Ohbayashi san has a
  suberb ear for details like capacitor and chip selection and came up
  with some great ideas for the pedal- a chip and diodes that made it
  sound even better! The special JRC chip he preferred was designed for
  audio tone controls, and has a warm yet clear sound. The diodes are
  more open sounding, for a stronger, clearer, less compressed sound and
  more volume. All the nuances of your playing and each string of the
  guitar will come through clearly.

  The Version 4 King of Tone was developed in late 2005 due to popular
  demand for separate controls for each channel of the original 4 knob
  KoT. The original KoT was one overdrive circuit, with 2 channels,
  having separate volume controls and internal configurations. Almost
  all "dual overdrive" pedals available are like this. The Ver4 KoT is
  actually TWO overdrive pedals in one box, one on each side. Remember
  that each side is a separate pedal, and they are the same except for
  how you set the DIP switches. Each side has an on/off switch, LED, and
  three independant knobs. Each side also has configuration DIP switches
  and a TREBLE trim pot on the inside. Having two actual overdrive
  circuits allows you to use both pedals at once, in series (stacking)
  for even more possible tones and levels of drive!

  Each side has it's own Volume, Drive, and Tone control and LED. We use
  SUPER BRIGHT Yellow and Red LEDs so you can easily tell which channel
  is selected. In addition, there is a TREBLE BOOST knob on the inside
  of the pedal. This is a small knob or trimpot which can be turned by
  hand or with a pick or small screwdriver. Jim does not need more
  treble for his Tele, but I found it allowed some superb tones with my
  '59 reissue Les Paul through my '69 Marshall amp, similar to the sweet
  yet biting tones of Michael Bloomfield (I believe he used a Fender
  Twin amp with his famous 1959 sunburst).

  There is also a four position configuration DIP switch on the inside
  of the KoT which you can use to choose between Clean, OD, and
  DISTORTION modes for each side. The modes are:

  1) Normal Overdrive mode (OD mode) : This is the standard King Of Tone
  sound, which Jim likes best- a little less drive available than a tube
  screamer. Factory DIP switch setting has this mode on the right (red)
  channel. This mode can get about 4 times louder than a tube screamer
  if desired. This mode engages SOFT CLIPPING like most overdrive
  pedals.

  2) CLEAN mode : This mode has less drive, can be used for clean boosts
  or clearer, louder sounds. It's like a clean boost with an overdrive
  knob. CLEAN MODE is even less compressed than the standard OD mode.
  The factory DIP switch setting uses this mode on the left (yellow)
  channel. This mode can get twice as loud as the OD mode. You can think
  of the clean mode as the OD mode with the overdrive removed, allowing
  louder, clearer tone. But the drive knob still functions and can add
  some drive to the sound, and volume as it's turned up. It's a cool
  sound with the drive knob cranked! This mode has NO CLIPPING, like
  most boost pedals.

  3) DISTORTION mode : This mode has more drive than the standard OD
  mode- a touch of hard distortion. The sound is more compressed, yet
  retains the King Of Tone character. This mode can get about twice as
  loud as a tube screamer. Think of this mode as a cross between a Boss
  DS-1 distortion and OD-1 overdrive, with more clarity. We recommend
  most players use the OD and CLEAN modes. While the DIST mode sounds
  great, and I like to use it on certain occasions, it does not allow
  the pedal to get its absolute BEST tones. You can put an aged single
  malt Scotch whisky on ice, but it would be a shame to dilute it! The
  DIST mode is awesome with the HIGHER GAIN option. This mode engages
  HARD CLIPPING like most distortion pedals and some fuzzes. It's best
  to turn the OD dip switch down when using the DIST mode, especially
  with the higher gain option to avoid duplicate clipping (soft and hard
  clipping together).

  Either side can be set to any of the three modes, with the DIP
  switches. I recommend setting the right side for most distorted sounds
  and the left for cleaner, then when used together you get more of a
  volume boost. But if you want more distortion and compression, you can
  try it the other way around too.

  At low DRIVE settings, or when playing softly, there is not much
  difference between the three modes- they all clean up very nicely as
  the clipping does not start until you turn the DRIVE knob up higher.
  This pedal cleans up a lot better than a Tube Screamer type pedal, if
  you play softly or turn your guitar down they will not have the
  underlying fuzziness that most pedals have.” Analog Man

Reverb.com • Gitarre & Bass (German) • Analog Man’s BEST Pedals (JHS)

The pedal’s controls are Drive, Volume and Tone.

The diode-based King of Tone model is a digital model of Analog Man’s
pedal. The pedal has two circuits, and each can be switched between
boost, overdrive and distotion. Fractal Audio has modeled the pedal in
the overdrive mode, which provides a mild overdrive. The distortion mode
doesn’t have the same appeal as the OD mode, and the pedal’s clean boost
is already covered by other models.

How to produce the clean boosted sound and distorted sounds of the pedal

    Jim Weider • That Pedal Show: King Of Tone Alternatives • That Pedal Show: Can Two Prince Of Tone Overdrives Sound Like One King Of Tone? • NickSterlingRocks • SuperFunAwesomeHappyTime Pedal Show • Carson Lee • Reverb.com • King of Tone vs Klon Centaur • Audiofanzine • Intheblues • What Is A Blues Breaker? (JHS) • Analog Man’s BEST Pedals (JHS) • John Wesley • Kenny Wayne Shepherd Rig Rundown • Daniel TheGigRig • gearmanndude: High Gain Red side • gearmanndude • Mark Pappas • Marty Music • Friday Fretworks • Paul Davids

TREBLE BOOST (silicon treble booster circuit)

[X Treble.jpg]

Original forum thread

This model is based on a classic treble booster circuit. This was
designed as an accessory for amplifiers to roll off lows and boost the
higher frequencies, like the Top Boost add-on for early Vox amps,
sitting on top of the amplifier. Guitar players soon discovered it was
also great for something else: pushing an edge-of-breakup or overdriven
amp into “more”. Emphasis on certain frequencies makes the treble boost
a non-clean boost but, unlike a fuzz, it stays close to the amp's raw
tone. It also creates awesome clean tones when turning down the guitar
volume. So, the label “treble booster” doesn’t really do justice to this
pedal’s possibilities. While the ’65 Dallas Rangemaster may be the most
famous one, other brands were also popular, like the Hornby-Skewes
Treble Booster, and Orange Treble&Bass Booster. The circuit is very
simple, and many clones of classic treble boosters exist. But because
they are rare, people pay thousands of dollars for an original. A
popular clone of the Dallas Rangemaster is made by Analog Man: Beano
Boost. BSM builds all kinds of treble boosters these days. Brian May
sells his own one, made by Knight Audio Technologies (KAT).

Famous treble boost users include Rory Gallagher, Jimmy Page, Jeff Beck,
Eric Clapton, Ritchie Blackmore (in Deep Purple’s “Child in time” and
“Smoke on the water”), Brian May, Tony Iommi (in Black Sabbath's
“Paranoid”), Mark Bolan, Wishbone Ash and Billy Gibbons.

  “The Dallas Rangemaster Treble Booster was an effects unit made for
  guitarists in the 1960s. Its function was two-fold: to increase the
  signal strength of the guitar going into the amplifier, and to
  increase tones at the high end of the spectrum (a treble booster). The
  need for a treble booster arose in the mid-1960s as British amplifiers
  such as the Vox AC30 or Marshall JTM45, tended to produce a slightly
  dark, muddy sound when overdriven, particularly when used with
  humbucking pickups. A pre-amplifier that also boosted treble proved a
  solution. The Dallas Rangemaster Treble Booster was first made in the
  1960's by Dallas Musical Ltd., incorporated in 1959. It made guitars
  and amplifiers under different brand names, including Dallas,
  Shaftesbury, and Rangemaster. The unit is simple, and consists of a
  grey metal box with an on/off switch, a potentiometer for the booster
  setting, and an in- and output. It is made to stand on top of an
  amplifier rather than on the floor. Its circuitry is simple, and
  contains (besides the potentiometer--usually 10K, sometimes 20K--and
  the on/off switch) only a germanium transistor, four capacitors, three
  resistors, and a battery. The transistor was a Mullard or unbranded
  OC44 or Mullard OC71. By the 1980s Treble Boosters had gone out of
  fashion. How many Rangemaster Treble Boosters were built is unknown.
  Due to limited supply on the second hand market they are collectible,
  even if the going rate is only a fraction of what it used to be in the
  mid-2000s. In Premier Guitar, Kenny Rardin describes his quest for one
  of the effects, which started with puzzlement over how Eric Clapton
  and Ritchie Blackmore achieved their tone; he spent years looking for
  a Rangemaster. Rumours of Eric Clapton having used a Rangemaster
  Treble Booster during his stint with John Mayall's Blues Breakers have
  never been confirmed. Photos of the recording sessions of the "Blues
  Breakers With Eric Clapton" exist, but a Rangemaster Treble Booster is
  not visible in any of them. It is assumed the rumours started in the
  late 90's when clones of the Rangemaster Treble Booster.” Wikipedia

Reverb.com • Gitarre & Bass • Vintage Guitar • Premier Guitar: The
Rangemaster • Electrosmash • Guitaraholicsu • GEO Fex • Analog Man’s
BEST Pedals (JHS)

The Dallas Rangemaster’s only knob was “Set”, which adjusts the amount
of boost.

  "Boost was a switch and engaged the effect. Set was the amount of
  boost and is equivalent to Drive." Fractal Audio

To get the most out of a treble booster, use it as intended: select the
Normal (dark) channel of a turned-up Vox or Plexi, and turn down the
guitar volume. Don’t run it into a clean amp.

Fractal Audio’s Treble Boost model is modeled after a silicon treble
booster. It has not been disclosed which actual circuit it is based on.
The Rangemaster used germanium transistors, while Hornby-Skewes built
silicon-based boosters. The Eternal Love drive model can also operate as
a treble booster. Fractal Audio provides a separate Mid Boost model. The
use of a treble booster is featured in some factory presets. Search this
wiki page for “treble”. The Treble Booster is also available as an input
boost type in the Amp block.

    With a Vox AC30 ‘63 JMI • The First Guitar Effects Ever (JHS) • TheToneShack • British Pedal Company • Rory Gallagher • That Pedal Show: Tremendous Treble Boosters for Glorious Classic Drive Tones • Pete Thorn: The Most Underrated Guitar effect • Pete Thorn: Everyone Needs a Treble Booster • Brett Kingman: Fryer Treble Boosters

TS9DX + (Ibanez TS9DX Turbo Tube Screamer)

[Ts9dx.jpg]

See T808.

TS9DX HOT (Ibanez TS9DX Turbo Tube Screamer)

See T808.

TUBE DRIVE 3-KNOB (Butler Tube Driver)

[X TubeDriver.jpg]

Original forum thread

The Tube Driver is one of those rare pedals that contains a real tube
and uses it. It was originally designed by B.K. Butler, now Butler
Audio, a keyboard player, to simulate an overdriven Hammond organ as
heard in Deep Purple material. Eric Johnson used a Tube Driver into a
jumpered Plexi when recording his classic “Cliffs of Dover” recording.
Other famous users include Joe Satriani, David Gilmour and Billy
Gibbons. The name of the unit can cause some confusion. We have the
Chandler Tube Driver, the Tube Works Tube Driver and the Butler Tube
Driver. Butler’s first prototypes were marketed by a 3rd party:
Chandler. According to Butler, Chandler ran off with the design and
began selling copies, excluding Butler from the deal. Butler then
started Tube Works, later simply named Butler. The 4-knob version costs
$299.

  “Actually the Chandler thing was a relatively minor incident in the
  overall history of my business activities. There’s not enough room
  here to elaborate much, but the truth of the matter is that somehow
  Chandler decided at one point that they had been the designer of the
  product, came up with the TD trademark and that I was infringing on
  their IP. They obviously had somebody attempt to copy the electronics
  and the physical design of my TD, then produced and sold them. I don’t
  know how many unauthorized units are out there. The mistakes inside
  are essentially within the EQ area and it would take too long to
  describe them. Also there is a basic ground loop mistake as well. The
  overall sound of the C copy is somewhat muted and not as clear on the
  upper harmonics, etc. Eric Johnson never used one of these copies as
  far as I know. All his pedals are ones I personally made. I never
  could understand why Chandler did that copy thing… They even
  challenged me in court and tried to convince the judge that Chandler
  was the actual owner of my design and the Tube Driver trademark. But
  the truth was obvious: In the end what was mine to begin with remains
  mine still… I then designed the black Real Tube pedal in 1986 which I
  still think is a superior pedal in some ways to the Tube Driver (ZZ
  Top’s Billy Gibbons agrees) and then went on to design all my Tube
  Works SKUs: MosValve, Tube Works Real Tube rack products, combo amps
  and reverb… then the smaller 3 knob version of the Tube Driver was
  designed in an attempt to give an entry level price to tube lovers.
  Actually I never completely stopped making original Tube Driver
  pedals, but just didn’t emphasize them so much during the early TW
  years. Later in about 1993 or 1994 I revived the pedal in earnest and
  named it after my ‘love on 4 wheels’, the model 911. Many will be glad
  to know that I’m now making a few new Tube Drivers per month again due
  to word of mouth ‘push’. They have better components than the original
  as far as pots, capacitors, etc. I still use metal Switchcraft jacks
  and they’re completely true to the original design.” Butler

  "There is NO Chandler Tube Driver… Never was a Chandler Tube Driver!
  They just marketed it for a while. But I do understand the confusion
  caused when I allowed their name to be included on my product. My
  lesson was well learned… enough said.” Butler

Kit Rae’s Tube Driver Page

Original controls on the 3-knob version: Out Level, EQ and Tube Drive.
Original controls on the 4-knob version: Out Level, Lo and Hi EQ, and
Tube Drive.

Eric Johnson (see pic) uses the 4-knob version into his jumpered Plexi
(actually, 5 knobs because it has an additional Bias control) and turns
off Bass and Treble completely. Like EJ, most players seem to prefer the
4-knob model of the real pedal because it is true to the original,
according to Butler. In this video Andy Wood demonstrates that the pedal
works best with jumper amp channels instead of a single channel.

When it comes to Fractal Audio’s models, the 3-knob model is more of a
favorite. It’s based on the entry-level Tube Driver, has more top end
and its gain is more manageable. The models are featured in some factory
presets. Search this wiki page for “Tube Drive” or “Tube Driver”. When
turn down Drive to zero, there’s almost no output level. For cutting
blues and rock tones, set Drive between 3 and 6 on the 3-knob version,
decrease Tone and run it into a Fender amp model.

  "The 3-knob version sounds very different than the 4-knob version."
  Fractal Audio

  "Both of my actual pedals go silent with the Drive set to zero as
  would be expected looking at the design." Fractal Audio

    Texas Blues Alley • Jason Hobbs • shnobel • Eric Johnson's rig rundown • Gearmanndude • BK Butler Tube Driver vs TS808 • What's Inside This • Tube Driver vs TS9 vs SD1 • Joe Perkins • That Pedal Show • Guitarsenal • Ibanez Tube Screamer or BK Butler Tube Driver (That Pedal Show)

TUBE DRIVE 4-KNOB (Butler Tube Driver)

[X Tube4.jpg]

See above.

  "The model matches our reference pedal. I don't know when it was made
  but it's likely a later version because it has the "Bias" pot on the
  back. It has B. K. Butler's signature on the bottom. Some versions had
  a 10nF coupling cap before the first tube stage. Others had a 47nF
  cap. Our reference pedal has a 47nF cap. You can simulate the 10nF
  coupling cap by increasing the Low Cut control to 794 Hz.” Fractal
  Audio

TUBE DRIVE 5-KNOB (Butler Tube Driver / Dean Markley Overlord)

See above.

  "It's actually based on a Dean Markley Overlord.” Fractal Audio

The Dean Markley Overlord was built by Butler for Dean Markley, and is
identical to Butler's 5-knob Tube Driver, the one Eric Johnson uses. The
additional knob controls the bias of the internal tube.

    Video

VALVE SCREAMER VS9 (Ibanez TS9 Tube Screamer)

[Ts9.jpg]

See T808.

ZEN MASTER (Hermida Zendrive)

[X Zen.jpg]

Original forum thread

This model is based on the most famous “Dumble-in-a-box” pedal, designed
in collaboration with Robben Ford to get thick “Dumblesque” tones from
Fender amplifiers. Read more about Dumble amplifiers in the Guide to the
Fractal Audio Amp Models. Gary Clark Jr. is another Zendrive user. The
pedal was designed by Alfonso Hermida, a former airplane and NASA
employee. These days Hermida has teamed up with Lovepedal to build his
pedals ($240). The pedal excels at thick, creamy overdrive with lots of
mids, but much different from a Tube Screamer. It’s very dynamic and
responds well to the player’s attack. It works best with clean amps and
many players prefer it with humbucker pickups.

  “The standard in dynamic, touch-sensitive overdrive pedals. Cut
  through the mix with the incomparable Zendrive. Inspired by a
  legendary guitarist, the Zendrive delivers blues, country, jazz and
  fusion tones associated with some of the finest, most costly
  amplifiers in the market. Four knobs control the overall volume, gain,
  tone and voicing of the pedal. At lower settings, the pedal offers
  extremely light overdrive sounds reminiscent of tube amps set near the
  “sweet spot.” At higher settings, the Zendrive increases in gain and
  sustain, producing tasty overdrive and low distortion tones.”
  Lovepedal

  “It always sounds scratchy during sound check, but once the band
  starts to play, it sounds great. It’s a mystery.” Carl Verheyen in
  Tone Wizards 

Review in Premier Guitar • Robben Ford’s Zendrive settings • Robben Ford
at TPS

Original controls are: Vol, Gain (model: Drive), Tone (high cut) and
Voice (cuts lows and controls the gain range). The Voice control is key
to matching the pedal / model with the amp and guitar pickup. It tweaks
the gain and bass response. Tone is a high cut, so turn it up. With a
clean amp turn up Voice. Or run it into a dirty amp, with everything
around 4 for a thick, searing and singing lead tone.

  "When I used the schematic on the web the model sounded nothing like
  my pedal. So I opened it up and made some measurements. The schematic
  on the web shows the Drive pot as being 500K but mine measures 1M. My
  feedback cap is 47 pF whereas the web schematic is 100 pF. Maybe when
  Lovepedal took over the build they changed some values. The model
  reflects our reference pedal.” Fractal Audio

The model is featured in some factory presets. Search this wiki page for
“Zen”.

    Sean Michael • intheblues • Session • That Pedal Show 1: Dave Kilminster • That Pedal Show  • Pepe Navarro • Sam Vilo • Robben Ford's Rig Rundown • Camilo Velandia: Original vs Modded vs Zendrive 2 • Camilo Velandia: Axe-Fx Vs Zendrive • gearmanndude 1 • gearmanndude 2 • Brett Kingman • The SuperFunAwesomeHappyTime Pedal Show • Zendrive circuit experiment (Wampler) • Lovepedal vs Hermida • Chris Buck • John Cordy • Robben's Settings • John Cordy 1 • John Cordy 2

Videos

エラーが発生しました。

JavaScript を実行できませんでした。

エラーが発生しました。

JavaScript を実行できませんでした。

Retrieved from
"https://wiki.fractalaudio.com/wiki/index.php?title=Drive_block&oldid=100200"

Categories:

- Axe-Fx2
- Axe-Fx3
- FM3
- FM9
- AM4
- VP4
- AX8
- FX8
- Sounds
- All
